Massive Open-Vocabulary Keyword Spotting
Leonor Barreiros ID 1, Raul Monteiro ID 1,2,3, Afonso Mendes ID 1, Gonc ¸alo M. Correia1
1 Priberam Labs, Lisboa, Portugal
2 Instituto Superior T´ecnico, Lisboa, Portugal
3 Instituto de Telecomunicac ¸˜oes, Lisboa, Portugal
{leonor.barreiros, raul.monteiro, amm, goncalo.correia}@priberam.pt
Abstract
Automatic speech recognition systems have been shown to
under-perform when it comes to transcribing words rarely seen
in the training data, namely specialized terminology. Open-
vocabulary keyword spotting, combined with contextual bias-
ing, has been shown to mitigate this issue. However, existing
systems can only handle glossaries of a few hundred terms with-
out becoming an infeasible bottleneck. We propose a system
that stores features with a memory footprint up to128times
smaller than a comparable baseline and allows users to process
massive databases while remaining open-vocabulary. Without
fine-tuning the speech recognition model, our system achieves
a comparable entity recall as uncompressed solutions, even in
languages not seen during training.
Index Terms: automatic speech recognition, keyword spotting,
embeddings compression, contextual biasing.
1. Introduction
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) is a task where spoken
language is transcribed into text. It is crucial in several ap-
plications, from virtual assistants to live captions in various
domains [1, 2]. The Whisper [3] models, which are encoder-
decoder models, are some of the most popular speech founda-
tion models for ASR, and recent works have focused on repro-
ducing them using public data and open-source code [4]. How-
ever, most models struggle with specific terminology that was
rarely seen during training [5]. This greatly impacts the applica-
bility of ASR in production setups where domain-specific terms
are employed (e.g., healthcare and air traffic control), since cor-
rectly transcribing these keywords is essential for extracting the
necessary semantic information for downstream analysis.
Contextual biasing (CB) in ASR is a technique in which
generation is steered with a provided context. In this study,
the context is specialized terminology in the word distribu-
tion’s tail, and CB amounts to promote these otherwise missed
terms. Many works address CB by prompting [6, 7]. The de-
coders of acoustic encoder-decoder models such as Whisper are
audio-conditional language models, which consider previously-
transcribed text during generation to improve transcription co-
herence. In addition to the previous context, it is possible to
inject a biasing list with specific terminology directly into the
ASR model decoder prompt [8]. To address long biasing lists,
some solutions integrate keyword spotting (KWS) models to de-
tect relevant keywords that should integrate a short biasing list
[9]. Keyword spotting is a task in which a system determines
whether a keyword is said in an utterance. Open-vocabulary
KWS (OV-KWS) is a subclass of KWS where any keyword
may be used for queries at inference time. Given a glossary
of entity words and an utterance, the ASR systems considered
in this work first use an OV-KWS model to determine which
keywords appear in the utterance. Then, the detected keywords
are prompted into the ASR model’s decoder, which will be pos-
itively biased towards predicting them.
This technique was originally proposed by [10] for ASR
systems that integrate Whisper models for speech recognition.
More recently, [11] improved domain generalizability. Both
works rely on distributed representations extracted from audios
where the keywords are spoken. The latter studied the impact
of using synthetic word audios, produced with either a text-to-
speech (TTS) model or cut from utterances where they natually
appear, whereas the former only relied on synthetic keyword au-
dios. Other solutions, such as [12, 13] encode utterance audios
and keyword texts and project audio and text embeddings to a
shared hyperspace. While efficient, text-audio embeddings lose
acoustic information, and the way words are pronounced is not
deterministically tied to how they are written. The importance
of the information given by the acoustic encoder, to correctly
transcribe rare words, was additionally documented by [5, 14].
In this work, we claim the works of [10, 11] have limited
applicability to production environments. The adopted acous-
tic model fromWhisper-medium, which has24transformer
layers, is used to encode both utterance and keyword audios. In
[10], the authors chose to aggregate the representations from the
10th to the21 st layer and in the latter, the authors aggregated
the representations from the last12layers, without specifying
what motivated their choices. Most importantly, acoustic fea-
tures are very high-dimensional, and, consequently, it is infea-
sible to process glossaries with a massive number of items us-
ing an acceptable amount of resources. Namely, in these works
glossaries of up to500keywords were used, and in our experi-
ments we constructed a glossary of16,062terms.
We propose a system that makes a significant leap in la-
tency and memory over the baseline of [11] by adding an em-
bedding compression module that projects cues into a smaller-
dimensional manifold. Our experiments demonstrate our sys-
tem can process massive databases6times faster using128
times less memory. Our contributions are:
• We propose an automated way to sparsely identify layers
from transformer-based acoustic encoders that are most pre-
dictive for keyword spotting.
• We propose an embedding compression mechanism over
three dimensions that is able to compress acoustic embed-
dings128times while preserving the baseline performance.
• We demonstrate, in a production system, the impact (latency-
and memory-wise) of our compression methodology.
The source code for this work is inhttps://github.com/
Priberam/Enhance-CB-Whisper.
1
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1444
kwd
utt
Audio
Encoder
cossim ResNet s(kwd, utt)
f kwd
f utt
Figure 1:OV-KWS: keyword and utterance are encoded, cosine
similarity matrices are computed, and a ResNet detects whether
the keyword is present in the utterance.
glossary
TTS Whisper
encoder
MLP
Conv
hidden states
(compressed) 
lcomp layers
(compressed)
database
Figure 2:Embedding compression pipeline. The most relevant
layers of the Whisper encoder are selected, an MLP reduces the
hidden dimension, a CNN reduces the temporal resolution.
2. Methodology
2.1. Baseline for OV-KWS
The OV-KWS system from CB-Whisper [10] is based on two
modules.(1)A transformer-based audio encoder from a Whis-
per model that encodes each audio as embeddings inR l×f×h ,
wherelis the number of selected transformer layers from which
representations are extracted,fis the number of frames, and
his the hidden dimension.(2)A Resnet binary classifier that
takes pairs of keyword and target utterance embeddings and pre-
dicts whether the keyword is or is not present in the utterance.
Keyword and utterance pairs are jointly represented aslcosine
similarity matrices, on which the classifier attempts to detect
diagonal features. During training, positive examples are ran-
domly sampled for each utterance and keywords not present in
the utterance but lexicographically similar to the positive word
are used as hard negative examples. Fixed-size cosine similar-
ity matrices are used to improve generalization, where the ut-
terance and keyword embeddings are zero-padded in the frame
axis tof utt andf kwd, respectively. The baseline OV-KWS sys-
tem is schematized in Figure 1.
In production settings, the embeddings of keywords from
a glossary of words are pre-computed from audios where the
keywords are spoken and then stored in a database. Keyword
audios can be synthesized using a text-to-speech (TTS) model
or cut from utterances where they naturally occur. This works
as long as the training data includes both TTS-generated and
natural-speech audios for the keywords [11]. The existing so-
lution was proven to be effective for keyword glossaries up to
a few hundreds. However, since its complexity grows linearly
with the number of entity words in both memory and latency, it
becomes inefficient in production environments, where latency
is critical, and glossaries may have thousands of keywords.
More specifically, when storing a database of keywords in
32-bit, using the baseline [10], wherel= 12,f= 150and
h= 1024, requires4×12×150×1024≈7.3MB per key-
word. If the number of keywords is larger than11,650, it is
not possible to load the glossary database on a GPU with80GB
memory (e.g., NVIDIA A100). Our work explores simple tech-
niques to improve the efficiency of KWS with respect to this
baseline. While remaining proportional to the number of key-
words (to preserve OV), our system’s representations are128
times smaller, allowing894,784terms on a GPU with48GB
memory (e.g., NVIDIA L40). Figure 2 illustrates the process of
creating a compressed keyword database.
2.2. First compression: selecting Whisper-encoder layers
The first compression technique amounts to choosing the trans-
former layers from the audio encoder whose representations are
aggregated to generate embeddings, both for the utterances and
keywords. We propose an automated strategy to sparsely choose
the layers whose representations are most predictive for KWS.
Letlbe the number of layers of the audio encoder andw∈R l
a trainable score vector. Applying the sparsemax activation
function [15] yields a probability vectorp=sparsemax(w)∈
∆l−1, where∆ l−1 is the(l−1)-dimensional probability sim-
plex. Consider a complete embeddingx∈R l×f×e that ag-
gregates the representations of all encoder layers. We gate the
embedding as˜x=p⊙x, where⊙is the Hadamard product.
The score vector should be trained jointly with a Resnet clas-
sifier on these gated embeddings, using the usual binary cross-
entropy lossL BCE for KWS together with an auxiliary loss
Laux =H(p)to promote sparsity, whereH(·)stands for the
entropy of a categorical distribution. The non-zero entries ofp
after training determine a sparse set of layers whose representa-
tions together are predictive for KWS. Denote bylcomp the size
of this set.
2.3. Second compression: reducing the hidden dimension
Embeddings can be further compressed by reducing the hidden
dimension fromhtoh comp, whereh comp < h. To accom-
plish this, a lightweight one-hidden-layer feed-forward network
(FFN) can be trained to compress the embeddings along the hid-
den dimension, both for the utterance and keyword embeddings.
The FFN and the Resnet classifier should be jointly trained with
the usual binary cross-entropy loss for KWS.
2.4. Third compression: reducing the frame rate
The embedding size depends linearly on the number of frames,
f utt andf kwd for the utterances and keywords, respectively.
Decreasing the frame rate is thus a natural strategy to further
compress the embeddings. Whisper encoders induce a frame
rate of 50 s−1 in the embeddings, which can be further reduced
using a lightweight 1D convolutional neural network (CNN)
along the frame direction with adequately designed kernel sizes,
strides, and pooling layers. If the frame rate decreases by a fac-
tor ofα, so do the number of frames for the utterances and key-
words,f utt
comp =f utt/αandf kwd
comp =f kwd/α, respectively.
2.5. Contextual biasing Whisper
Whisper is an end-to-end ASR model composed of an encoder
and a decoder. The Whisper decoder is an audio-conditional
language model, trained on a next-token prediction task. Whis-
per was also trained to consider previous tokens during genera-
tion. This is implemented by adding context tokens before the
<|startoftranscript|>token, which indicates the be-
ginning of generation. CB replaces the history tokens with a
custom prompt, in this case the hotwords detected by the OV-
KWS mechanism. This was originally proposed by [10] and is
equally applied in this work.
2
3. Experimental setup
3.1. Datasets
3.1.1. Training data
The training data for our models was extracted from the Mul-
tilingual Librispeech (MLS) corpus [16], derived from read au-
diobooks. As it is an imbalanced dataset, we reused [11]’s code-
base to prepare 25 h of training data for six languages: English,
French, German, Polish, Portuguese, and Spanish. To define
the training keywords, the authors used spaCy [17] to extract
the nouns and proper nouns in the transcripts and randomly se-
lected12,000terms per language. This database of keywords
is fixed during training and used to extract positive and neg-
ative samples. Our models were also trained using a mixture
of natural-speech and TTS keyword audios, and the latter were
generated usingedge-tts[18].
3.1.2. Validation and evaluation data
In all validation and evaluation scenarios, we consider TTS-
generated keyword audios. This is because it is usually hard
to obtain natural-speech audios for domain-specific glossaries.
The MLS development split was used for validation, with
200keywords per language and the preparation of [11].
For evaluation, we used two open-source and one inter-
nal corpora. The former are Aishell [19] in Chinese and
ACL6060 [20] in English, both with manually-annotated hot-
words. Aishell was recorded in an isolated environment with
a high fidelity microphone, and is in a language unseen by the
KWS system. ACL6060 contains audios of live research pa-
per presentations, which are noisier and include technical terms.
The last corpus is a set of family medicine consultations in Por-
tuguese. Our system was trained on Portuguese utterances, but
a set of clinical dialogues allows to evaluate the advantage of
CB in a real-world application. As we want to evaluate how
our system performs on massive databases, we constructed a
glossary of medical keywords from the Portuguese catalogue of
clinical terms [21], comprising16,062terms after extracting all
words and removing stopwords and numerals.
The statistics of the evaluation corpora are in Table 1.
3.2. Experiment Configurations
Our experiments useWhisper-large-v2as the acoustic
encoder. Compared to the baselines of [10, 11], which use
Whisper-medium, our backbone hasl= 32instead of
lmedium = 24, andh= 1,280instead ofh medium = 1,024.
We took these differences into consideration when calculat-
ing our proposal’s memory savings. We setf utt = 1500,
f kwd = 150. For the classifier, we used ResNet-50[22].
Following [11], our training used a mixture of TTS and
natural-speech keywords, and lexicographic hard negatives. We
reused the baseline’s hyperparameters and a learning rate of
1×10 −4 for the added parameters. All experiments were con-
ducted on an NVIDIA L40 GPU.
Table 1:Evaluation datasets’ statistics.
Duration (min) Utterances Entities
Aishell76 808 400
ACL606051 123 200
Internal103 210 16,062
3.2.1. First experiment:L-comp
Our first experiment only applies the layer compression in-
troduced in Section 2.2. We added a trainable score vector
w∈R 32 and trained it with a Resnet classifier on the pro-
duced gated embeddings. After training, the sparse score vector
identified3predictive layers:14,16and32(wherel= 32).
3.2.2. Second experiment:LH-comp
Our second experiment accumulated layer compression with the
embedding compression introduced in Section 2.3. We added
an FFN with h
2 hidden units and selectedh comp = 64.
3.2.3. Third experiment:LHF-comp
Our third experiment accumulated the two previous compres-
sions with the resolution compression introduced in Section 2.4.
We added a1D CNN composed of a convolution operation with
kernel size3and stride1, followed by a batch normalization
layer, followed by a max-pooling layer with kernel size3and
stride2. This results in a compression factorα= 2.
3.2.4. Contextual biasing experiments
To evaluate the impact of our solution, we compare both tran-
scription quality and efficiency on the evaluation corpora under
three scenarios:(1)without biasing,No-CB,(2)using the recre-
ated setup of [11],Baseline recr., and(3)using the setup with
the most compressed embeddings,LHF-comp. In setup(2), as
it was not possible to fit the database in memory, we batched
groups of125keywords for an equivalent memory footprint.
To perform CB, we prepend OV-KWS toWhisperX[23],
based onWhisper-large-v2, and passed the KWS output
to thehotwordsargument oftranscribe.WhisperX
leverages voice-activity detection (V AD) to process long-form
audio efficiently, which is suitable for production environments.
3.3. Evaluation details
3.3.1. Keyword-spotting model evaluation
For the open-source corpora, performance of KWS was evalu-
ated with F1 under the optimal threshold (defined on the valida-
tion corpora). We also produce precision-recall curves. For our
internal dataset, we relied in top-kselection, withk= 5and
report F1@5.kis purposefully low because using CB increases
the risk of hallucinations [8]. Results are reported with a95%
confidence interval, computed with bootstrapping [24].
3.3.2. Keyword-guided ASR evaluation
We evaluate transcription with normalized mixed-error-rate
(MER) and entity recall. MER is equivalent to character er-
ror rate in no-space languages and word error rate in space-
based languages. Our normalization procedure corresponds to
removing punctuation and lowercasing. Recall accounts rec-
ognized keywords in the transcriptions. The evaluated tran-
scription is based on the one obtained with CB, after aligning
it with the unbiased transcription, on the character level, using
the Needleman-Wunsh algorithm [25]. This helps mitigate CB-
inflicted hallucinations. To obtain the KWS output, we used the
optimal thresholds calculated during validation for each corpus.
We additionally measured the resource savings when using
our proposed compression method. We report the real time fac-
tor (RTF) for processing each 30 s utterance and the memory
footprint for storing each keyword database.
3
Table 2:ASR evaluation on Aishell-test, ACL6060-test and our internal evaluation corpus. We report mixed error rate (MER), recall
(R), real time factor (RTF) and the database’s memory footprint (MB).
ACL6060 Aishell Internal
MER R RTF Memory MER R RTF Memory MER R RTF Memory
No-CB (ours)27.6 52.5 0.03 0.0 18.0 40.2 0.03 0.0 29.5 70.9 0.07 0.0
Baseline recr. [11]27.0 54.3 0.18 1,406 24.9 59.3 0.29 2,812 28.7 72.0 4.52 112,929
LHF-comp21.9 57.2 0.17 11 14.7 71.3 0.10 22 32.4 71.5 0.76 882
Table 3:KWS metrics (F1 and F1@5), with a95%confidence
interval, on Aishell-test, ACL6060-test and the Internal corpus.
ACL6060 Aishell Internal
F1 F1 F1@5
Baseline [10]−89.0−
Baseline [11]65±4 71±5 22±2
L-comp37±4 43±6−
LH-comp63±7 84±3 13±1
LHF-comp69±4 86±4 28±2
Figure 3:Precision-recall curves for the models trained with
each of the proposed compressions.
4. Experimental Results
4.1. Keyword-spotting experiments
The performance of our OV-KWS model and the baselines is
in Table 3. All evaluations were out-of-domain for ours and
[11]’s models, unlike for [10] in Aishell. The model which
produces the smallest embeddings,LHF-comp, achieves a com-
parable performance to the best-performing model on Aishell,
even though it was not trained with this corpus or with any sam-
ples in Chinese. It also has the best F1-score on the technical
ACL6060. Adding more trainable parameters after minimizing
the number of layers allows to learn a projection of the embed-
ding space with distinctive KWS features.
Precision-recall curves are in Figure 3. The ACL6060 test
set is more challenging, we hypothesize as it contains more
domain-specific terms, namely abbreviations with a non-trivial
phonetic transcriptions that existing TTS systems may not cap-
ture. In addition, while Aishell was produced in a quiet envi-
ronment and contains high-quality, clean audios, ACL6060 was
produced with live presentations which are naturally noisier.
4.2. Keyword-guided ASR experiments
ASR evaluation metrics are in Table 2. On ACL6060 and
Aishell, where we used threshold-based KWS on a small glos-
sary with high recall, using CB is advantageous. On our Inter-
nal corpus, where KWS is performed on a massive non-curated
glossary, although we see the efficiency advantage of using our
method, using CB worsens ASR performance.
On the one hand, the glossaries for ACL6060 and Aishell
were extracted from the nouns in their gold transcripts, so the
gold keywords are aligned with the transcripts. However, for
the Internal dataset, the glossary is an unprocessed set of words,
including a lot of common words (e.g., allergens) that are dis-
tactors either because the unbiased ASR model can detect them
or because they lead to false positives in CB. Whisper’s prompt
conditioning was trained as the previous segment’s context, so
it is not robust against irrelevant entries and is sensitive to spuri-
ous matches, which was also documented by [8]. While our so-
lution is the only one that allows us to efficiently process a mas-
sive glossary, additional efforts must be made to curate produc-
tion databases to the desired applications. On the other hand,
analyzing the MER,WhisperXuses V AD for segmenting au-
dios, which may lead to error propagation. For the open-source
corpora, where utterances are short, disabling V AD would en-
sure no information would be lost. For our internal corpus, we
had to segment audios as we used entire consultations which
were much longer than 30 s.
Finally, we note that only withLHF-comp were we able
to process a massive glossary. Whereas for the smaller, manu-
ally annotated, glossaries of ACL6060 and Aishell the RTF is
acceptable for deployment, for the real-world glossary the over-
head of batch processing (which implies GPU transfers) and
KWS computation becomes infeasible.
5. Conclusion
Contextual biasing is an effective technique to improve the qual-
ity of ASR systems in specialized domains. Given a biasing
list of domain-specific terms, from the tail word distribution, it
steers generation to include them. Open-vocabulary keyword
spotting aids in ensuring concise biasing lists, with terms that
appear in the input query. This paper claims that efficient solu-
tions, that encode keyword texts and utterance audios, are not
effective, and that effective solutions, that encode keyword and
utterance audios, are not efficient. In scenarios such as the clin-
ical, there is a massive amount of terms to identify, and KWS
cannot be a bottleneck. We propose compressing Whisper en-
coder embeddings, including sparsely selecting audio encoder
layers whose representations are more predictive for KWS, to-
gether with a lightweight compression module that compresses
along the hidden dimension and frame length. Our experiments
demonstrate that the compressed features are as informative as
the uncompressed ones, saving128times memory and6times
latency. Future work on this topic should explore compression
on the glossary dimension, using domain-specific heuristics. It
should also explore current techniques to reduce hallucinations
even in the presence of distractor words.
4
6. Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Portuguese Recovery and
Resilience Plan through project C645008882-00000055 (i.e.,
the Center For Responsible AI).
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
All references were obtained via Google Scholar search, and
we studied them ourselves. We used Claude Code (Opus 4.8)
for the integration of the codebase we had previously produced
(without any generative AI) with the existing codebase for pub-
lication. No new code was generated, and we manually re-
viewed it to ensure that. The entirety of this paper and its re-
visions were written manually.
8. References
[1] S. Latif, J. Qadir, A. Qayyum, M. Usama, and S. Younis, “Speech
technology for healthcare: Opportunities, challenges, and state of
the art,”IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, vol. 14, pp.
342–356, 2020.
[2] D. Caballero, R. Araya, H. Kronholm, J. Viiri, A. Mansikkaniemi,
S. Lehesvuori, T. Virtanen, and M. Kurimo, “ASR in classroom
today: Automatic visualization of conceptual network in science
classrooms,” inECTEL. Springer, 2017.
[3] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, and
I. Sutskever, “Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak su-
pervision,” inICML, 2023.
[4] Y . Peng, J. Tian, W. Chen, S. Arora, B. Yan, Y . Sudo, M. Shakeel,
K. Choi, J. Shi, X. Changet al., “OWSM v3. 1: Better and Faster
Open Whisper-Style Speech Models based on E-Branchformer,”
inInterspeech, 2024.
[5] N. Yamashita, M. Yamamoto, H. Kokubo, and Y . Kawaguchi,
“LLM-based Generative Error Correction for Rare Words with
Synthetic Data and Phonetic Context,” inInterspeech, 2025.
[6] G. Sun, C. Zhang, and P. C. Woodland, “Minimising biasing word
errors for contextual asr with the tree-constrained pointer gener-
ator,”IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing, vol. 31, pp. 345–354, 2022.
[7] I. Nigmatulina, S. Madikeri, E. Villatoro-Tello, P. Motlicek,
J. Zuluaga-Gomez, K. Pandia, and A. Ganapathiraju, “Implement-
ing contextual biasing in gpu decoder for online asr,” inInter-
speech, 2023.
[8] X. Gong, A. Lv, Z. Wang, and Y . Qian, “Contextual biasing
speech recognition in speech-enhanced large language model,” in
Interspeech, 2024.
[9] A. Shamsian, A. Navon, N. Glazer, G. Hetz, and J. Keshet,
“Keyword-Guided Adaptation of Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion,” inInterspeech, 2024.
[10] Y . Li, Y . Li, M. Zhang, C. Su, J. Yu, M. Piao, X. Qiao, M. Ma,
Y . Zhao, and H. Yang, “CB-whisper: Contextual biasing whisper
using open-vocabulary keyword-spotting,” inLREC-COLING,
2024.
[11] R. Monteiro, “Adding User Feedback To Enhance CB-Whisper,”
inInterspeech, 2024.
[12] K. Nishu, M. Cho, and D. Naik, “Matching Latent Encoding for
Audio-Text based Keyword Spotting,” inInterspeech, 2023.
[13] H.-K. Shin, H. Han, D. Kim, S.-W. Chung, and H.-G. Kang,
“Learning audio-text agreement for open-vocabulary keyword
spotting,” inInterspeech, 2022.
[14] S. Ghosh, M. S. Rasooli, M. Levit, P. Wang, J. Xue, D. Manocha,
and J. Li, “Failing forward: Improving generative error correction
for asr with synthetic data and retrieval augmentation,” inACL,
2025.
[15] A. Martins and R. Astudillo, “From softmax to sparsemax: A
sparse model of attention and multi-label classification,” inICML,
2016.
[16] V . Pratap, Q. Xu, A. Sriram, G. Synnaeve, and R. Collobert,
“MLS: A Large-Scale Multilingual Dataset for Speech Research,”
inInterspeech, 2020.
[17] spaCy: Industrial-strength NLP, “spaCy,” https://spacy.io/models,
accessed: 2026-02-28.
[18] Rany, “edge-tts,” https://github.com/rany2/edge-tts, accessed:
2026-02-22.
[19] H. Bu, J. Du, X. Na, B. Wu, and H. Zheng, “AIShell-1: An open-
source mandarin speech corpus and a speech recognition base-
line,” inO-COCOSDA, 2017.
[20] E. Salesky, K. Darwish, M. Al-Badrashiny, M. Diab, and
J. Niehues, “Evaluating multilingual speech translation under
realistic conditions with resegmentation and terminology,” in
IWSLT, 2023.
[21] P. M. of Health, “Cat ´alogos sem ˆanticos da sa ´ude (seman-
tic health catalogues),” https://www.ctc.min-saude.pt/category/
catalogos/, 2022, accessed: 2026-02-21.
[22] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” inIEEE conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2016.
[23] M. Bain, J. Huh, T. Han, and A. Zisserman, “WhisperX: Time-
Accurate Speech Transcription of Long-Form Audio,”Inter-
speech, 2023.
[24] L. Ferrer and P. Riera, “Confidence intervals for evaluation in ma-
chine learning,” https://github.com/luferrer/ConfidenceIntervals,
accessed: 2026-02-22.
[25] S. B. Needleman and C. D. Wunsch, “A general method applicable
to the search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two
proteins,”Journal of molecular biology, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 443–
453, 1970.
5