Beyond Two-stage Diffusion TTS: Joint Structure and Content Refinement via
Jump Diffusion
Jiabao Ai1, Minghui Zhao 1, Anton Ragni 1
1 The University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
jbai4514@gmail.com, mzhao39@sheffield.ac.uk, a.ragni@sheffield.ac.uk
Abstract
Diffusion and flow matching TTS faces a tension between
discrete temporal structure and continuous spectral modeling.
Two-stage models diffuse on fixed alignments, often collapsing
to mean prosody; single-stage models avoid explicit durations
but suffer alignment instability. We propose a jump-diffusion
framework where discrete jumps model temporal structure and
continuous diffusion refines spectral content within one pro-
cess. Even in its one-shot degenerate form, our framework
achieves 3.37% WER vs. 4.38% for Grad-TTS with improved
UTMOSv2 on LJSpeech. The full iterative UDD variant fur-
ther enables adaptive prosody, autonomously inserting natural
pauses in out-of-distribution slow speech rather than stretch-
ing uniformly. Audio samples are available at https://
anonymousinterpseech.github.io/TTS_Demo/.
Index Terms: Text-to-speech, jump diffusion, diffusion mod-
els, flow matching, mean collapse, alignment, duration model-
ing
1. Introduction
Speech is inherently dual-natured. It consists of a discrete tem-
poral structure, namely the precise alignment and rhythmic tim-
ing of linguistic units, and continuous spectral content that re-
alizes the acoustic details.
In diffusion and flow-matching[1] TTS models, alignment
refers to the process of mapping input text phones or charac-
ters to temporal frames in the output speech. Alignment strate-
gies fall into two paradigms. The first relies on explicit frame-
level phone alignment, obtained either via learned methods such
as Monotonic Alignment Search (MAS) [2] or external forced
alignment tools such as the Montreal Forced Aligner (MFA) [3].
Models such as Grad-TTS [4], Matcha-TTS [5] and V oice-
box [6] first predict phone durations, upsample the sequence,
and then condition diffusion on this fixed structure. This offers
stability but decouples temporal structure and spectral content
modeling, often leading to mean prosody and resorting to uni-
form mechanical stretching when adapting to total length con-
straints [7].
The second paradigm comprises single-stage models such
as E3 TTS [8], E2 TTS [9], F5-TTS [10], and M3-TTS [11].
These forgo explicit alignment and rely on attention mecha-
nisms. While more flexible, they suffer from instability [10,
12, 11].
Although novel diffusion and flow-matching TTS mod-
els continue to appear, this fundamental dichotomy remains
unresolved. In this work, we argue that a joint generative
process is essential. We introduce a jump diffusion frame-
work [13] that unifies discrete jumps with continuous refine-
ment within a single iterative process. This enables temporal
structure and spectral content to co-evolve while still leveraging
phone-level alignment. To reconcile variable-length jumps with
standard fixed-dimensional diffusion networks, we propose an
Upsample–Diffuse–Downsample (UDD) strategy.
Our main contributions are threefold: (1) a jump-diffusion
framework that flexibly unifies discrete temporal structure and
continuous spectral modeling—even when degraded to a one-
shot variant it outperforms the regression-based Grad-TTS
baseline, while the full iterative form enables adaptive prosody;
(2) the UDD mechanism that enables efficient reuse of pre-
trained diffusion networks, circumvents the training instabilities
and performance degradation observed in Trans-Dimensional-
Diffusion (TDD), and supports iterative joint refinement of
structure and content; and (3) empirical validation on LJSpeech
showing superior intelligibility (lower WER) and natural pause
insertion in out-of-distribution slow speech compared to two-
stage baselines, while maintaining competitive naturalness.
2. Background
2.1. Score-based Diffusion Probabilistic Modelling
Generative modeling via diffusion[14, 15] can be formulated
using Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs). Following the
framework established by Song et al. [16], we define a forward
noising process that gradually transforms the data distribution
toward a tractable reference distribution according to the It ˆo
SDE:
dx = f(x,t )dt +g(t)dw, (1)
where f(x,t ) is the drift term, g(t) is the diffusion coefficient,
and w is a standard Wiener process. To generate data, we
reverse this process from noise back to data using the corre-
sponding reverse-time SDE, whose drift depends on the score
∇x logpt(x):
dx =

f(x,t )−g2(t)∇x logpt(x)

dt +g(t)d ¯w. (2)
Here,∇x logpt(x) denotes the time-dependent score function,
which estimates the gradient of the log-density and steers sam-
ples along the density trajectory from noise back to data. In
practice, this score is approximated by a neural networksθ(x,t )
trained via score matching.
The same marginal density path can also be described by
the deterministic probability flow ODE[17]:
dx =

f(x,t )− 1
2g2(t)∇x logpt(x)

dt. (3)
This formulation is particularly important because it eliminates
stochastic noise while preserving the exact same marginal dis-
tributions as the reverse SDE, enabling faster and fully repro-
ducible sampling.
3600
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2875
2.2. Jump Processes in Generative Modeling
Recent work in generative modeling [18, 19, 20, 13, 21, 22] has
highlighted the limitations of purely continuous diffusion and
flow-matching (FM) dynamics when modeling multi-modal or
heavy-tailed distributions. This is particularly relevant to TTS,
where the same text can correspond to multiple valid temporal
structures. Models that commit to a single fixed temporal struc-
ture may therefore collapse toward averaged timing patterns,
while rare events in prosody like silent pauses remain crucial
for naturalness and intelligibility [19, 7]. A natural extension is
to augment continuous diffusion with discrete jumps:
dxt = f(xt,t )dt +g(t)dwt +dJt, (4)
where Jt is a jump process that admits diverse designs de-
pending on the state space and probability path [20]; in this
work, we follow the trans-dimensional formulation of [13],
where jumps alter the dimensionality of the state.
3. Method
We adapt this idea to TTS (Fig. 1, Fig. 2): a Location Predic-
tor determines where to insert new temporal frames, a Content
Predictor generates what to fill in, and standard diffusion steps
refine the spectral content.
Figure 1: jump diffusion process for Mel-spectrograms.
3.1. Forward Jump Diffusion
The forward process q(xt | x0) transforms the ground-truth
Mel-spectrogram x0 ∈ RD×L0 (where D = 80 is the num-
ber of Mel-frequency bins and L0 is the original number of
time frames) into a variable-length latent state xt ∈ RD×Lt
by coupling structural corruption (frame deletion) and spectral
corruption (Gaussian noise addition, following the standard dif-
fusion process in Section 2.1).
Structural Corruption. We define a protected setP con-
taining the first frame of each phone (derived from forced align-
mentA). For t ∈ [0, 1], the target length follows the linear
schedule
Lt =|P| +

1− t−tmin
1−tmin

(L0−|P| )

. (5)
Following [13], we set tmin = 0.1. Frames not in P are ran-
domly removed until the target length Lt is reached, yielding
the downsampled sequencexsub
t ∈ RD×Lt and the correspond-
ing encoder output µsub
t .
Spectral Corruption. Following the variance-preserving
diffusion SDE described in the Background (Eqs. (1)–(3)),
Gaussian noise is added to xsub
t relative to the phone-level en-
coder output µsub
t :
xt = xsub
t exp

− 1
2
Z t
0
βsds

+ µsub
t

1− exp

− 1
2
Z t
0
βsds

+
s
1− exp

−
Z t
0
βsds

· zt, (6)
where zt∼N (0, ID×Lt).
To generate training targets for the jump predictors,
we additionally simulate a single-step transition by ran-
domly removing one column k from xt, forming the triplet
(x\k
t ,s target, xk
0).
Algorithm 1 Forward Process & Training Target Generation
1: Input: x0, µ,A; Samplet∼U (0, 1)
2: ▷ 1. Structural Corruption
3: ift>t min then
4: L0← Length(x0)
5: P← first-frame indices of each phone inA
6: Lt← ScheduleLength(L0,|P|,t ) ▷ Eq. (5)
7: SampleIkeep of sizeLt s.t.P⊆I keep
8: xsub
t ← x0[:,Ikeep], µsub
t ← µ[:,Ikeep]
9: else
10: xsub
t ← x0, µsub
t ← µ
11: end if
12: ▷ 2. Spectral Corruption
13: zt∼N (0, I)
14: xt← AddNoise(xsub
t , µsub
t ,t, zt)
15: ▷ 3. Single-step Jump Targets
16: k∼U{ 1,..., Length(xt)}
17: x\k
t ← Delete(xt,k ), xk
0← xsub
t [:,k ],starget←k
18: return xt,{x\k
t , xk
0,s target}
3.2. Reverse Process (Inference)
Figure 2: Inference pipeline. Starting from a noisy and incom-
plete phone-level state, the model iteratively performs jumps
and diffusion.
3601
The reverse process starts from a compressed phone-level state
x1≈ ˜µ (where ˜µ∈ RD×Nphone is the non-upsampled output
of the frozen text encoder) and progressively grows it to the tar-
get lengthLtarget. The target lengthLt at each reverse step fol-
lows the same linear schedule as the forward process (Eq. (5)),
traversed in reverse from L1 =|P| toL0 = Ltarget. It inter-
leaves discrete structural expansions with continuous spectral
refinements (see Algorithm 2).
Structural Jump. At step t, we compute the number of
insertions needed Nins = max(0,Lt− len(xt)). The Loca-
tion Predictor (Section 3.3) samples insertion slots S, and the
Content Predictor generates new frame content ˆx0. Inserted
columns in the priorµt are created by duplicating the left neigh-
boring frame.
Spectral Diffusion. The expanded sequence is updated via
a standard reverse diffusion step (SDE or ODE solver, Eq. (2)
in Background) to reduce spectral noise.
Algorithm 2 Inference
1: ˜µ,L target← Encoder(Text)
2: x1← ˜µ + z; µt← ˜µ
3: fort = 1→ 0 do
4: Nins← max(0,Lt− len(xt))
5: ifNins > 0 then
6: S ← Sample Nins slots from
LocationNet(xt, µt,t )
7: ˆx0← ContentNet(xt, µt,t,S )
8: xt← Insert(xt, Noised(ˆx0,t ),S)
9: µt← Insert(µt, µt[S],S )
10: end if
11: xt← DenoiseStep(xt, µt,t )
12: end for
13: return x0
3.3. Implementation Details
We adopt the text encoder and U-Net diffusion backbone from
the official Grad-TTS checkpoint [4] and keep them frozen dur-
ing training of the jump predictors. The framework introduces
two additional networks:
Content Predictor. To reconstruct deleted frames, we use a
bidirectional Transformer encoder (8 layers, 8 heads). The input
is the reduced prior µt and xt with the target column zeroed
(in-place masking). A 1D convolution extracts local features,
followed by the Transformer for global context. The network
predicts a residual ∆:
ˆxk
0 = µk
t + ∆. (7)
The loss is
Lcont =∥ˆxk
0− xk
0∥1 +λprior∥ˆxk
0− µk
t∥2
2. (8)
Location Predictor (Lloc): The Location Predictor identi-
fies the optimal insertion slots∈{ 0,...,L t− 1} for the gen-
erated frame, where Lt is the current sequence length at time
t. It utilizes a 4-layer Transformer encoder to generate frame-
level representations hs. A linear scoring head is applied to hs
to produce logitsoj. The training objective is the cross-entropy
loss over theLt possible insertion positions:
Lloc =−
Lt−1X
j=0
yj log
 
exp(oj)PLt−1
k=0 exp(ok)
!
, (9)
where yj is the one-hot target indicating the original deletion
index (i.e., the position of the frame that was removed during
the forward process).
3.4. UDD and One-shot Variant
Location predictor
Content predictor
Diffusion net
Figure 3: Upsample–Diffuse–Downsample (UDD).
The Location Predictor can also act as an upsampler. Given a
sequence xt ∈ RD×Lt, it predicts a distribution over Lt in-
sertion slots. To reach the target length Ltarget, we allocate
Nadd =Ltarget−Lt new frames according to this distribution.
If all insertions happen in a single step at the very begin-
ning, our model degrades to a One-shot variant in which the
Location Predictor replaces Grad-TTS’s regression-based dura-
tion predictor with a classification-based alternative.
This insight leads to the Upsample–Diffuse–Downsample
(UDD) strategy (Fig. 3). We first expand the variable-length
state to a fixed-length canvas by inserting frames predicted by
the Location and Content predictors. A standard reverse diffu-
sion step is then applied to this full-length representation. Fi-
nally, we downsample by retaining only the original columns
and proceed to the next iteration. UDD thus enables itera-
tive joint refinement of temporal structure and spectral content
while reusing the pretrained fixed-dimensional diffusion net-
work without retraining.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
Experiments are conducted on the LJSpeech [23] using the
standard partitions from [4]. The diffusion network and text
encoder follow the Grad-TTS architecture [4] and are initial-
ized with pretrained weights. The proposed jump predictors
are optimized using Adam (lr = 1× 10−4). All training hy-
perparameters exactly follow the original Grad-TTS recipe [4].
Waveform synthesis uses a pretrained HiFi-GAN vocoder [24].
For evaluation, intelligibility (WER) is measured with Whisper
medium [25] and naturalness with UTMOSv2 [26].
4.2. Main Results and Comparisons
We evaluate spectral accuracy (MCD), prosodic consistency
(Log-F0 RMSE), naturalness (UTMOSv2), and intelligibility
(WER). To ensure a fair comparison, the total target length
Ltarget for each utterance is kept identical to Grad-TTS across
all systems.
3602
Table 1: Main evaluation results.
Method WER (%) ↓ MCD↓ Log-F0 RMSE↓ UTMOSv2↑
Grad-TTS 4.38 5.872 ± 0.52 0.330 ± 0.09 4.024 ± 0.21
One-shot 3.37 5.914± 0.55 0.332 ± 0.08 4.050± 0.21
TDD (Sample) 6.31 6.057 ± 0.58 0.341 ± 0.09 3.867 ± 0.21
TDD (Argmax) 7.66 5.850 ± 0.61 0.341 ± 0.10 3.988 ± 0.25
UDD (Sample) 4.55 5.860 ± 0.54 0.344 ± 0.09 3.989 ± 0.20
UDD (Argmax) 4.71 5.830± 0.55 0.332± 0.08 4.003 ± 0.22
Classification vs. regression for duration modeling. The
One-shot model achieves the lowest WER (3.37%) and high-
est UTMOSv2 (4.050), improving substantially over Grad-TTS
(4.38% WER, 4.024 UTMOSv2). Since One-shot replaces only
the regression-based duration predictor with our classification-
based Location Predictor while keeping all other components
identical, this result directly confirms that modeling phone du-
rations as a categorical distribution over insertion slots captures
the multi-modal nature of speech timing better than MSE re-
gression, which collapses toward mean durations and underrep-
resents rare durational events such as pauses.
Why TDD fails. TDD applies the U-Net architecture di-
rectly, resulting in the worst WER across all variants (6.31–
7.66%). We attribute this to two factors. First, the input dimen-
sionality changes at every diffusion step, drastically increasing
the task uncertainty faced by the network and making learning
harder. Second, the convolutional backbone possesses transla-
tion invariance but lacks scale invariance; since the sequence
dimensionality changes during the process. Together, these is-
sues cause TDD to degrade severely compared to fixed-length
alternatives.
UDD: bridging variable-length jumps and fixed-
dimensional diffusion. UDD resolves the dimensional mis-
match by temporarily upsampling the sequence to the target
length before each diffusion step. This preserves the pretrained
U-Net’s inductive bias and yields the best MCD (5.830) and
competitive Log-F0 RMSE (0.332) among all diffusion-based
variants.
4.3. Adaptive Pauses in Slow Speech
The preceding experiment evaluates all systems at matched tar-
get lengths derived from ground-truth durations. We now test
a more challenging scenario: synthesizing speech at 0.75×
speed. This out-of-distribution setting reveals how each model
distributes the additional frames.
Table 2: Duration breakdown and intelligibility at0.75× speed.
Silence Ratio = Silence / Total.
Method (0.75×) Avg Total (s) Avg Silence (s) Sil. Ratio ↑ WER (%)↓
GT (1.00×) 6.26 0.45 7.19% 1.94
Grad-TTS 7.37 0.47 6.38% 4.29
UDD (Argmax) 7.37 0.71 9.63% 4.09
UDD (Sample) 7.37 0.61 8.28% 4.19
Grad-TTS stretches uniformly.As shown in Fig. 4, Grad-
TTS produces a near-linear DTW alignment path, indicating
that the extra frames are distributed proportionally across all
phones. Its silence ratio (6.38%) is even lower than the ground
truth at normal speed (7.19%), confirming that uniform stretch-
ing dilutes pauses rather than preserving them.
Jump-based models redistribute duration adaptively.
UDD allocates substantially more duration to silent pauses,
with UDD (Argmax) reaching a silence ratio of 9.63%—well
above the 6.38% of Grad-TTS and even exceeding the ground-
truth level (7.19%). Its DTW path (Fig. 4) and correspond-
ing Mel-spectrograms (Fig. 5) exhibit a clear staircase pattern,
where vertical jumps correspond to the autonomous insertion
of linguistically appropriate pauses. This adaptive redistribu-
tion yields the lowest WER in this setting (4.09% vs. 4.29%
for Grad-TTS), confirming allocating extra duration to pauses
rather than uniformly stretching all frames benefits intelligibil-
ity.
Figure 4: DTW alignment paths at 0.75× speed.
Figure 5: Example Mel-spectrograms at 0.75× speed.
5. Conclusion and Future Work
We presented a jump-diffusion framework that unifies discrete
temporal structure modeling and continuous spectral refinement
within a single probabilistic process for TTS. Even in its sim-
plest one-shot degenerate form, our framework achieves 3.37%
WER and 4.050 UTMOSv2, outperforming the regression-
based duration modeling baseline (4.38% WER, 4.024 UT-
MOSv2), confirming the advantage of classification-based du-
ration modeling. The full iterative UDD variant further enables
adaptive prosody: in slow speech, it autonomously inserts lin-
guistically appropriate pauses rather than uniformly stretching
all frames, achieving 4.09% WER compared to 4.29% for Grad-
TTS with a silence ratio of 9.63% versus 6.38%.
Currently, jumps operate exclusively on temporal structure,
leaving spectral content to be refined solely by continuous diffu-
sion. Future work will explore jumps in the spectral domain to
enable discrete corrections of spectral content alongside struc-
tural changes[18, 19, 20, 21]. We also plan to evaluate on
multi-speaker and more spontaneous speech corpora, where the
greater prosodic variability is expected to further highlight the
advantage of our jump-based duration modeling [7].
3603
6. Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the UKRI AI Centre for
Doctoral Training in Speech and Language Technologies (SLT)
and their Applications funded by UK Research and Innovation
[grant number EP/S023062/1]. For the purpose of open access,
the author has applied a Creative Commons Attribution (CC
BY) licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version aris-
ing.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used only for assistance with language
polishing and formatting. The authors reviewed and verified all
content and take full responsibility for the manuscript.