Which Data Matter?
Embedding-Based Data Selection for Speech Recognition
Zakaria Aldeneh1, Skyler Seto1, Maureen de Seyssel1, Jie Chi1, Zijin Gu1, Takuya Higuchi1,
Jee-weon Jung1, Shinji Watanabe2, David Grangier1, Barry-John Theobald1,
Tatiana Likhomanenko1
1Apple
2Carnegie Mellon University
zaldeneh@apple.com
Abstract
Modern ASR systems are typically trained on large-scale
pseudo-labeled, in-the-wild data spanning multiple domains.
While such heterogeneous data benefit generalist models de-
signed for broad deployment, they pose challenges for special-
ist models targeting specific domains: specialist models lack
the capacity to learn from all available data. In this work, we
study targeted data selection to address these challenges, se-
lecting relevant subsets from100k hours of in-the-wild training
data to optimize performance on target domains. We represent
speech samples using embeddings that capture complementary
characteristics—speaker attributes, phonetic content, and se-
mantic meaning—and study how relevance and diversity along
these axes when performing data selection affect ASR perfor-
mance. Our experiments with CTC-based models show that
training on a strategically selected5%subset can exceed the
performance of models trained on the full data by up to36.8%
relative WER reduction.
Index Terms: speech recognition, data selection, speech repre-
sentations
1. Introduction
The curation of large-scale training datasets has had a notable
impact on speech processing tasks, including automatic speech
recognition (ASR) [1–4]. Such datasets expose speech models
to a wide range of acoustic conditions, speakers, and record-
ing scenarios, enabling them to learn robust representations and
achieve strong performance. However, such success is typically
achieved with generalist models that have the capacity to lever-
age the scale and heterogeneity of the training data. In practice,
we often deploy specialist models tailored to specific domains
or tasks—models that lack the capacity to learn from all avail-
able training data effectively. For these specialist models, do-
main mismatch between training and test conditions becomes
essential: a specialist model cannot capture all the details of
a large, heterogeneous dataset and must instead focus on data
closely aligned with the target conditions. This scenario moti-
vates our central question:Can we strategically select subsets
of large-scale, in-the-wild data that enable specialist models to
outperform models trained on the full dataset?
Mismatch between the train and test domains along any di-
mension of variation in speech can degrade performance. Prior
work has shown, for example, that models trained primarily
on read speech perform poorly when evaluated on spontaneous
speech [5]. Similarly, the performance of models trained on na-
tive accents degrades when applied to accented or non-native
speech [6–8]. These observations highlight that not all training
data are equally useful for a given target domain, and an ef-
fective data selection strategy cannot rely on a single notion of
similarity. Effective data selection, therefore, requires capturing
relevance across multiple, complementary axes of speech vari-
ability, rather than relying on a single notion of similarity when
addressing the mismatch between train and test conditions.
We study targeted data selection for ASR in the regime
of large-scale in-the-wild training data (over100k hours) and
specialist models with approximately10-100M parameters
(production-size models). We represent speech samples using
embeddings that capture diverse properties—speaker, phonetic,
and semantic—and use them to select subsets of data that are
both relevant to the target domain and diverse along these di-
mensions. We analyze which characteristics matter most for
downstream performance, and whether combining multiple rep-
resentations yields additional gains. Our experiments span mul-
tiple target datasets and operate at a scale representative of mod-
ern ASR training pipelines that rely on large-scale in-the-wild
pseudo-labeled data, offering insights into effective data selec-
tion in that regime. Specifically, we show that one can achieve
up to36.8%improvement in performance on target domains
with data selection in this training regime, even with5%of the
total available training data.
2. Related Work
Data selection has been studied in the context of ASR [9–19].
Prior work approached the problem from several perspectives:
improving training efficiency by reducing dataset size [9–12],
selecting samples for active learning [13, 15], selecting sam-
ples to annotate by humans under limited annotation bud-
gets [14, 20], and improving domain-specific performance by
prioritizing relevant data [16–19]. Our work focuses on the last
setting: selecting relevant samples from large-scale in-the-wild
training corpora to accommodate train/test mismatches to im-
prove performance on a specific target domain.
Confidence-based strategies have been widely used in semi-
supervised and active learning settings, where samples are cho-
sen based on model prediction confidence. However, selecting
data solely based on confidence has been shown to be subop-
timal for downstream performance [13]. These findings mo-
tivated distribution-matching approaches that account for do-
main mismatch. For example, Zhang and Rudnicky [9] se-
lected subsets with uniform coverage over linguistic units such
as words or phonemes. Other methods used learned representa-
tions for data selection. Acoustic-based approaches have used
i-vectors [21] and other low-level signal statistics to measure
similarity between candidate and target samples. Lu et al. [18]
641
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3073
proposed unsupervised selection using discrete speech units de-
rived from self-supervised models. Afshan et al. [17] used
sequence-level confidence scores from pre-trained ASR mod-
els to identify informative samples for domain adaptation. Ran-
gappa et al. [22] combined domain classifiers with pseudo-label
filtering to select unlabeled data for fine-tuning. In the context
of self-supervised learning, Gody et al. [23] explored data selec-
tion for fine-tuning pre-trained speech models on downstream
tasks.
We differ from prior work in three key aspects: (1)
Scale: we operate on100k+ hours of in-the-wild pseudo-
labeled data (Granary [24, 25]) to train production-scale spe-
cialist models (10-100M parameters), whereas most prior work
used small-scale datasets (e.g., Switchboard, LibriSpeech); (2)
Multi-embedding selection: we capture complementary speech
characteristics—speaker, phonetic, and semantic—and analyze
both their individual impact and the benefits of combining them,
rather than focusing on a single aspect; (3)Multi-target selec-
tion: we balance relevance and diversity while selecting for
multiple target domains simultaneously, rather than optimizing
for one domain at a time.Overall, we study a setting increas-
ingly common in practice: using large-scale, diverse in-the-
wild pseudo-labeled data to train specialist ASR models for
specific target domains.
3. Approach
3.1. Subset Selection
LetD source denote a large-scale in-the-wild training dataset and
Dtarget a small validation set drawn from the target domain. Note
thatD target is small (e.g., one hour of speech) and insufficient
for training a model from scratch. We seek to select a subset
S⊂D source, substantially smaller than the full dataset, that is
informed byD target and can be used to train an ASR model that
performs well on the target domain. Letϕbe an embedding
extractor that maps a variable-length utteranceu i to a fixed-
size embeddingx i ∈R d, capturing relevant characteristics
of the utterance. For example, ifϕis a speaker embedding
function, similarity between embeddings reflects closeness in
speaker characteristics. Using these embeddings, we can iden-
tify source samples that are most relevant to the target domain.
Specifically, for each candidate training samplex∈D source, we
define its relevance to the target set as the maximum similarity
to any target embedding:
sim(x,D target) = max
y∈Dtarget
sim(x,y),(1)
where sim(·,·)is a similarity measure, e.g., cosine similarity.
A simple strategy would be to select the top-ksamples
by this relevance score. However, this strategy can lead to
redundant samples that provide overlapping information. To
address this limitation, we use Maximal Marginal Relevance
(MMR) [26], which balances relevance to the target set with di-
versity among the selected samples in aniterativefashion. At
each selection step, MMR chooses the next samplexby maxi-
mizing:
MMR(x) =λsim(x,D target)−(1−λ) max
s∈S
sim(x,s),(2)
whereSis the set of samples already selected, andλ∈[0,1]
controls the trade-off between relevance and diversity. This pro-
cedure produces a subset that is both representative of the tar-
get domain and non-redundant, improving model generalization
compared to random selection.
3.2. Embedding Selection
Our data selection framework relies on an embedding function
ϕ(·)that captures relevant characteristics of speech to quantify
the similarity between source and target utterances. A key de-
sign choice is therefore which characteristics of the speech sig-
nal should be emphasized when defining relevance and diver-
sity. We evaluate three embeddings—speaker embeddings[27],
WavLM embeddings[28], andSBERT embeddings[29]—each
capturing distinct aspects of speech. By comparing their ef-
fectiveness within the same MMR-based selection framework,
we can determine which characteristics are most important for
data selection in ASR training and separate the benefits of
embedding-based selection from other factors.
Speaker Embeddings (Speaker Characteristics).Speaker
embeddings are designed to encode speaker-specific attributes
such as vocal tract characteristics, demographic cues, and
speaking style, while being largely invariant to linguistic con-
tent. However, prior probing studies [30] have shown that
speaker embeddings capture additional factors beyond speaker
identity. These factors include session conditions, recording en-
vironments, data augmentations, and even transcription-related
artifacts. As a result, using speaker embeddings for data se-
lection biases the selected subset toward source samples whose
speakers and acoustic conditions are most similar to those in the
target domain.
WavLM Embeddings (Phonetic Characteristics).WavLM
embeddings are designed to encode phonetic and sub-phonetic
information while being largely invariant to speaker identity and
acoustic variations [28]. WavLM extends HuBERT [31] by in-
corporating noise-robust and mixture-aware pretraining objec-
tives, enabling it to learn phonetic representations that are in-
variant to background noise, reverberation, and speaker over-
lap. Prior probing studies on HuBERT have shown that its
representations strongly correlate with linguistic units such as
phones and articulatory features [32–34]. As a result, using
WavLM embeddings for data selection biases the selected sub-
set toward source samples that are similar to the target domain
in terms of phonetic coverage and pronunciation patterns rather
than speaker characteristics.
SBERT Embeddings (Semantic Characteristics).SBERT
embeddings [29] are derived from textual transcripts and cap-
ture the semantic and syntactic properties of utterances. Us-
ing SBERT for data selection emphasizes coverage of linguistic
meaning, vocabulary, and sentence structure present in the tar-
get domain. Using SBERT embeddings enables us to assess
whether aligning the semantic distributions of the training data
with those of the target domain improves ASR performance,
especially in domains with distinctive topics or lexical distribu-
tions. Unlike speaker or WavLM embeddings, SBERT embed-
dings require access to transcripts.
3.3. Multi-Embedding Subset Selection
In the single-embedding setting, MMR selects samples based
on a trade-off between relevance to the target domain and diver-
sity among selected samples, using a single embedding type,
ϕ(·). To use multiple embedding types, we can generalize the
relevance and diversity computations as follows. Let each utter-
anceu i haveKembeddings:
x(1)
i ,x (2)
i ,...,x (K)
i ;x (k)
i ∈R dk,
642
where each embedding corresponds to a different captured char-
acteristic of speech (e.g., speaker, phonetic, or semantic). For
relevance to the target domain, we compute a similarity score
for each embedding type and combine them via a weighted sum:
simmulti(xi,D target) =
KX
k=1
wk max
y∈D(k)
target
sim
 
x(k)
i ,y (k)
,(3)
wherew k controls the contribution of thek-th embedding.
Similarly, to encourage diversity, we compute for each em-
bedding the maximum similarity between the candidate utter-
ance and the already selected setS, and aggregate across em-
beddings using a weighted sum:
vi =
KX
k=1
wk max
s∈S
sim
 
x(k)
i ,s (k)
.(4)
The generalized MMR selection criterion becomes:
MMRmulti(xi) =λsim multi(xi,D target)−(1−λ)v i,(5)
whereλ∈[0,1]again controls the relevance–diversity trade-
off.
This formulation corresponds to a late-fusion strategy,
where relevance and diversity are computed separately within
each embedding space and combined at the score level. As a
result, samples that jointly satisfy multiple embedding criteria
are favored. In particular, a candidate that is close to the tar-
get domain across allKembeddings receives a high relevance
score, while a candidate that is dissimilar to previously selected
samples across all embeddings contributes to diversity and is
therefore more likely to be selected. While an early-fusion al-
ternative (e.g., concatenating embeddings prior to selection) is
possible, late fusion offers greater interpretability and control
by allowing explicit weighting of each embedding type viaw k.
3.4. Multi-Dataset Subset Selection
In some settings, we aim for a model that performs well on mul-
tiple target domains, without training a model for each domain
independently. In these settings, the target domain is composed
of multiple datasets,D target ={D (1)
target,...,D (M)
target}, each corre-
sponding to a different domain. To measure the relevance of a
source sample with embeddingxto multiple target datasets, we
consider two aggregation strategies: maximum aggregation and
mean aggregation.
In the maximum aggregation strategy, a source sample is
considered relevant if it closely matches at least one of the target
datasets:
simmax(x,D target) = max
m∈{1,...,M}
max
y∈D(m)
target
sim(x,y).(6)
This formulation is equivalent to taking the union of the target
data and then computing the maximum similarity between the
target data and samples from that union. In the mean aggre-
gation strategy, we define the relevance score by averaging the
maximum similarity within each target dataset:
simavg(x,D target) = 1
M
MX
m=1
max
y∈D(m)
target
sim(x,y).(7)
This formulation promotes selecting source samples that are
useful across multiple target domains rather than overly special-
ized to a single domain. The resulting relevance score is used
within the MMR objective to balance relevance and diversity
during subset selection.
Table 1:Summary of source and target datasets used in our
experiments. Granary serves as the large-scale, in-the-wild,
training source data. The target datasets—LibriSpeech, Com-
monVoice, and TED-LIUM—cover a wide range of domains.
Dataset sizes (in hours) are reported when available.
Type Dataset Hours (Train / Dev / Test)
Source Granary (English) 102,458 / – / –
Target LibriSpeech 961 / 10.5 / 10.7
Target CommonV oice 1,594 / 27.1 / 26.9
Target TED-LIUM 452 / 1.6 / 2.6
4. Datasets
We use the English portion of the Granary dataset as our pri-
mary source of training data [25]. Granary is a large-scale,
open-source, in-the-wild pseudo-labeled collection of speech
recordings covering a wide range of speakers and acoustic con-
ditions. Granary is based on YODAS [24] and provides a realis-
tic regime that closely reflects the data conditions encountered
when training speech models at scale, where large quantities of
pseudo-labeled data must be used to construct effective training
sets. Its large scale and diversity ensure that the subset selection
process provides sufficient coverage to demonstrate effective-
ness across different target domains. Although pseudo-labels
may introduce some noise, the dataset’s scale and variability
help mitigate this effect, and our experiments focus on measur-
ing relative improvements through subset selection.
To evaluate our subset selection approach, we consider
three widely used target speech corpora:
• LibriSpeech [35]: A high-quality dataset derived from audio-
books, commonly used for ASR benchmarking. LibriSpeech
contains both clean and noisy recordings across a diverse set
of speakers.
• CommonV oice English [1]: A crowdsourced dataset with
recordings from speakers with varied accents and recording
conditions. CommonV oice is useful for evaluating general-
ization to real-world scenarios.
• TED-LIUM [36]: A dataset of TED talk recordings, which
introduces domain-specific challenges such as spontaneous
speech, variable speaking rates, and diverse topics.
These target datasets span a broad spectrum of domain char-
acteristics and provide a diverse testbed for our data selection
framework. Detailed statistics for all datasets are provided in
Table 1.
5. Experiments
5.1. Main Experiments
The goal of the first set of experiments is to assess whether train-
ing on chosen subsets aimed at matching the target domain dis-
tribution outperforms training on the full, large-scale training
corpus.
5.1.1. Setup
Data.We use the English portion of Granary as our source
training datasetD source, and LibriSpeech, CommonV oice, and
TED-LIUM as our target domainsD target. The test sets of the
target datasets are kept untouched; only their validation sets
643
Algorithm 1Batched Greedy MMR Subset Selection
Input:Candidate embeddingsX∈R N×D , candidate durationsd∈R N , target embeddingsY∈R M×D , trade-off parameter
λ∈[0,1], subset fractionα, prefilter fractionρ, batch sizeB.
Output:Selected index setS.
1:T←α PN
i=1di ▷Target total duration
2:Compute relevance scoresr i = maxy∈Y sim(Xi,y)for alli
3:LetI←indices of the topρNcandidates ranked byr i ▷Relevance prefilter
4:InitializeS←∅,D sel←0
5:Selecti ∗ = arg maxi∈Iri
6:S←S∪{i ∗},D sel←d i∗
7:whileD sel <Tdo
8:R←I\S ▷Remaining candidates
9:ifR=∅then break
10:end if
11:Compute diversity scoresv i = maxs∈S sim(Xi,X s)for alli∈R
12:Compute MMR scoresm i =λr i−(1−λ)v i
13:Select top-Bindices fromRranked bym i
14:S←S∪top-B, updateD sel
15:end while
16:returnS
are used for subset selection. We apply Whisper normalizer1 to
all transcripts and use the same8k-token word-piece tokenizer
used in [37]. The audio is represented as80-dimensional log-
mel filterbank features, extracted using a25ms sliding window
with a10ms stride.
Embeddings.We extract speech and text embeddings from
pretrained models. Speaker representations are extracted from
an MFA-Conformer speaker recognition model [38]. We use ac-
tivations from the3072-dimensional penultimate layer. These
embeddings are subsequently projected to256-dimensional
space using Gaussian random projection [39]. 2 We use a pre-
trainedWavLM Base+ 3 model with768-dimensional embed-
dings to extract frame-level speech representations that primar-
ily capture phonetic and acoustic information. These embed-
dings are mean-pooled over time to obtain a single utterance-
level representation, which is then projected to256dimensions
using Gaussian random projection. Finally, to capture semantic
information, we use SBERT with theall-MiniLM-L12-v2
model to extract384-dimensional text-based sentence embed-
dings.4 These embeddings are used at their original dimension-
ality and are not projected to a lower dimension, as they are
already compact.
Model Architecture.We implement two variants of the Con-
former model for our experiments: Conformer-Small and
Conformer-Large. Conformer-Small (9M parameters) consists
of a convolutional encoder with1D convolution (kernel size7,
stride3,288filters) followed by16Conformer blocks with
an embedding dimension of144,4attention heads,576MLP
hidden units, and dropout of0.1. Conformer-Large (107M pa-
rameters) follows the same architecture but with larger dimen-
sions:1536convolutional filters, an embedding dimension of
1https://github.com/openai/whisper
2We quantify cosine preservation after random projection by com-
puting the correlation of pairwise cosine similarities over100k ran-
domly sampled pairs. We obtain a correlation of0.96and0.98for
speaker and WavLM, respectively, indicating that Gaussian random pro-
jection preserves relative geometry.
3https://github.com/microsoft/unilm/blob/
master/wavlm/README.md
4https://sbert.net/docs/sentence_transformer/
pretrained_models.html
512, and2048MLP hidden units, while maintaining16Con-
former blocks,4attention heads, and a dropout rate of0.1.
Training Recipe.Models are trained for500k steps on
8×A100(80GB) GPUs using AdamW optimizer and CTC loss.
Each GPU processes batches of up to500seconds of speech.
We apply gradient clipping with a maximum norm of0.5.
We use SpecAugment [40] after10k steps with two frequency
masks (maximum width30) and ten time masks (maximum
width50, maximum time-masking ratio0.1). The learning rate
is linearly warmed up to0.002over the first10k steps. Begin-
ning at step200k, we apply a cosine decay schedule, which is
updated every50k steps.
Data Selection.We set the MMR trade-off parameter toλ=
0.7, and ablate its effect in a later experiment. To scale MMR
to large datasets, we implement several modifications to im-
prove its efficiency: a batched selection procedure, candidate
pre-filtering, and limiting the number of target embeddings via
k-means clustering (k= 200). The detailed selection proce-
dure is summarized in Algorithm 1.
5.1.2. Results
We present our experimental results in two parts. Tables 2 and 3
establish the value of embedding-based data selection by com-
paring models trained on the full Granary corpus, random sub-
sets, and MMR-selected subsets across all three target domains.
Table 4 then examines multi-dataset selection strategies. We ad-
dress each of these comparisons in turn through the following
questions.
How does the performance of an ASR model trained on the
large-scale Granary dataset compare to models trained di-
rectly on the training sets of each target domain?Table 2
shows that training on the large-scale Granary dataset consis-
tently yields stronger cross-domain generalization than training
directly on the in-domain data of each target dataset. Models
trained exclusively on LibriSpeech or CommonV oice achieve
the best performance on their respective domains but exhibit
degradation when evaluated on mismatched test sets. Models
trained on TED-LIUM, however, lag behind models trained on
644
Table 2:WER (%) of Conformer models trained on different source datasets. The models are evaluated on LibriSpeech (clean/other),
CommonVoice (CV), and TED-LIUM test sets. Results are reported for both Conformer-Large and Conformer-Small architectures.
“Granary (Random 5%)” denotes training on a randomly selected 5% subset of Granary, while “Granary (Full)” uses the complete
dataset. Lower WER indicates better performance. Best results are shown inbold, and second-best results are underlined .
Model Training Data LS-clean LS-other CV TED-LIUM
Conformer-Small
LS-9605.2 12.245.4 18.9
CommonV oice 27.8 39.432.743.8
TED-LIUM 13.5 24.5 41.39.4
Granary (Full) 12.5 23.2 36.6 11.0
Granary (Random 5%) 12.5 23.5 37.1 10.7
∆%(Full→Random 5%)+0.0% +1.3% +1.4% -2.7%
Conformer-Large
LS-9603.2 8.040.4 14.9
CommonV oice 12.6 21.319.321.4
TED-LIUM 11.8 22.5 40.2 7.8
Granary (Full) 6.7 14.3 25.4 6.5
Granary (Random 5%) 7.1 14.9 26.2 6.9
∆%(Full→Random 5%)+6