Bilingual Speaker Phonetic Alignment to V oice Assistants
Alyssa Allen ID 1, Kathryn Campbell-Kibler ID 1
1 The Ohio State University, USA
allen.2334@osu.edu, campbell-kibler.1@osu.edu
Abstract
Users engage in conversation with ASR-powered voice assis-
tants, but these models favor Standard American English (SAE)
speech. Model bias impacts how non-SAE users engage with
human versus system voices. Linguistic accommodation mea-
sures how interlocutors engage with each other and can be
used to examine individuals’ relative acceptance of voice as-
sistants as social agents. This study asks how Spanish dominant
Spanish-English bilingual speakers phonetically align on voice
onset time (VOT) and vowel duration to human versus machine
voices in each language. Participants (N=50) in an online lexi-
cal shadowing experiment read a list of words, then shadowed
a human or voice assistant saying each word. Convergence was
found in terms of vowel duration and VOT across languages
and conditions, signaling bilingual speakers respond to machine
voices in human-like ways across languages. Condition and lan-
guage effects were mitigated by social information like dialectal
region and gender.
Index Terms: human-computer interaction, alignment, bilin-
gualism, phonetics, voice assistants
1. Introduction
V oice assistants such as Amazon’s Alexa and Apple’s Siri are
commonplace for many people, with 157.1 million voice assis-
tants projected to currently be in use in the United States and
132.9 million smart speakers believed to be shipped worldwide
in 2026 [1, 2]. People interact with voice assistant-enabled sys-
tems in intimate spaces such as their homes or on personal de-
vices. As people become increasingly comfortable with con-
versational AI, we can ask questions regarding how people per-
ceive and respond to these non-sentient human-sounding con-
versational partners.
The Computers Are Social Actors (CASA) paradigm
claims people easily attribute human traits to non-human enti-
ties and accept computers as social actors [3]. People easily use
female pronouns “she” or “her” to computer agents, but these
systems have no gender [4]. Yet, it is also socially acceptable
to refer to Siri as a “smart woman” or to say Siri or Alexa are
funny, polite, sweet, flirty – as if these systems were human
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. People can also describe their relational status to
voice assistants, such as a friend, confidant, secretary, or akin to
family [10, 11, 12, 13]. To the extent that users perceive voice
assistants as full social agents, we might expect their linguis-
tic behaviors when conversing with voice assistants to resem-
ble patterns seen in human-human interaction. Conversely, the
degree to which patterns found in human-machine interactions
align with patterns seen in human-human interactions could in-
dicate how strongly users implicitly perceive and accept artifi-
cial systems as social agents.
In conceptualizing how users perceive and personify voice
assistants, we consider that most popular voice assistants (e.g.
Apple’s Siri, Amazon’s Alexa) were first released in what peo-
ple typically refer to as Standard American English (SAE) and
all were voiced by adult, white, female voice actors [14, 15].
Companies later added voice options from various perceived
races and genders, and Apple stopped assigning the default
adult, white, female voice asSiriin order to allow users to
choose their preferred interlocutor [16]. Increasing voice op-
tions may be useful for participants who are unsatisfied hear-
ing the default female voice, but updating system voices fails
to address intelligibility concerns in the user-to-device direc-
tion [17, 18, 19, 20]. Historically, automated speech recognition
(ASR) technology performs best on English and particularly on
SAE. [21, 22, 23, 24]. Graham and Roll’s [25] analysis of ASR
performance on various English accents shows that mean word
error rates for transcripts of Spanish(L1)-English(L2) speakers
were higher than for transcripts of English(L1) speakers.
We aim to gain a deeper understanding of how non-native
(L2) English speakers interact with and implicitly perceive
SAE-biased voice assistants as human-like interlocutors. As
such, we have chosen to examine phonetic alignment as a
prominent and well-studied interactional phenomenon. In in-
teraction as well as lab tasks, humans often adjust some but
not necessarily all aspects of their language production to more
closely resemble an interlocutor [26, 27, 28, 29].
The population of focus for this paper is Spanish-English
bilingual speakers who live in Mexico and predominantly speak
Spanish. This population will allow us to examine to what ex-
tent human-machine interactions differ from human-human in-
teractions in both an L1-Mexican-Spanish to Mexican-Spanish
interlocutor context and an L2-English to Standard American
English interlocutor context. Our research question is: does
a Spanish(L1)-English(L2) bilingual speaker in Mexico con-
verge to a human voice more than to a synthetic voice and are
there qualitative convergence pattern differences between En-
glish and Spanish conditions?
This paper’s main contribution is in using phonetic align-
ment to assess the extent to which language and humanness
factors impact user acceptance of synthetic voices as similar to
human voices, specifically for Spanish-dominant Spanish(L1)-
English(L2) bilingual speakers. We find that convergence oc-
curs for vowel duration and VOT regardless of language or in-
terlocutor, signaling that bilingual participants conceptualized
voice assistant voices in Spanish and English as human-like.
2261
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2391
2. Related Work
2.1. V oice Assistant Anthropomorphism
The CASA paradigm claims humans attach qualities to objects
that are nonsensical when describing non-sentient entities but
reasonable when describing humans [3]. Qualities include age,
gender, intelligence, personality, etc. Anthropomorphism is re-
lated to CASA, but is more broadly described as attributing
human characteristics, motivations, or emotions to the behav-
iors of non-human entities [30]. Anthropomorphic tendencies
of users toward voice assistants aids in perceiving non-human
conversational AI systems as human-like interlocutors. This
perception of voice assistants is perhaps not surprising when we
also consider that companies promote these systems as having
human jobs (i.e. an assistant) and give many popular systems
human names (e.g. Siri and Alexa).
Etzrodt and Engesser [31] surveyed students at a German
University to categorize voice assistants along a subject-to-
object schema and found that participants largely defined voice
assistants as objects with person-like qualities, with some stu-
dents even categorizing the systems as a person-object hybrids.
People were aware that voice assistants were not human, but
did not perceive the systems as completely inanimate or non-
human. As mentioned in Section 1, people willingly use female
pronouns in reference to Siri and Alexa and perceive voice as-
sistants as having human personality traits. Lilly et al. [9] con-
ducted a social rating task of synthetic voices where partici-
pants were told the voices were either human or from devices
and found that voices rated as more robotic sounding were also
rated as less friendly, honest, and intelligent sounding. Interac-
tionally, users who anthropomorphize voice assistants are more
likely to have more positive views of their interaction with a sys-
tem when the voice assistant provides more in-depth and infor-
mative responses [32]. In essence, users expect to be understood
and communicated with by these systems in a human-like man-
ner. Conversational expectations that users have of non-sentient
voice assistants, and synthetic voices broadly, motivates explo-
ration of parallels between known human-human linguistic pat-
terns and human-machine linguistic patterns.
2.2. Phonetic Alignment
Humans often change various aspects of their speech to more
closely align to the speech of their conversational partner.
This adjustment happens at multiple levels of linguistic struc-
tures (e.g. speech style [33], syntax [26], phonetic [28, 29],
etc). Degree of convergence can fluctuate depending on so-
cial factors such as speaker conversational goals, familiarity
with their interlocutor(s), and feelings about their interlocu-
tor(s) [27]. In shadowing tasks where participants say words
or sentences before and after hearing a pre-recorded voice say
each word, convergence occurs as expected but we also see ef-
fects of social factors such as dialectal variation, gender, age,
etc. [34, 28, 35, 36, 37, 38]. For this study, we focus on align-
ment in Spanish and English to vowel duration [39, 40] and
voice onset time (VOT) [41, 42]. The present study tests both
Spanish and English contexts, so we consider language-specific
vowel duration and VOT details for each language as well as
how those differences likely interact for a bilingual speaker.
Spanish vowel duration is typically shorter than English vowel
duration. This pattern is particularly evident when comparing
phonemes present in both vowel systems [43]. English also con-
sists of more vowels and has a larger vowel space than Spanish,
with an 11-vowel system and 5-vowel system respectively [44].
Due to these distinct vowel systems, a Spanish(L1)-English(L2)
bilingual speaker likely has perceptions of the L2 vowel system
that are influenced by their L1 vowel system [45, 46]. For ex-
ample, a Spanish(L1)-English(L2) speaker may struggle to ac-
curately identify English /i/ from English /I/ and vice versa [47].
Phonemically, English /i/ and English /I/ may collapse into the
same mental representation since there is no /i/-/I/ distinction in
Spanish [47]. As Flege [46] suggests, these perceptual differ-
ences influence L2 production, especially if an L2 vowel space
is larger than the speaker’s L1 vowel space.
V oice onset time (VOT) is a characteristic of stops. The
present study focuses specifically on voiceless stops. In lexical
shadowing tasks, VOT convergence is stronger when partici-
pants shadow lower frequency words or produce more repeti-
tions of each token [41]. VOT convergence is also restricted by
a speaker’s phonological inventory, meaning VOT reduction is
less likely if converging to a shorter VOT would lead to cate-
gorical confusion with another word in the speaker’s language
[48]. When considering language-specific VOT patterns, En-
glish voiceless stops typically have longer VOTs than Spanish
stops. Longer VOTs are due to increased aspiration [49]. Word-
initial stops in English yield longer VOTs than word-intial stops
in Spanish because English speakers aspirate word-initial stops
(e.g. word-initial /t/ is realized as [t] in Spanish but [t h] in En-
glish [42]).
For this paper, vowel duration and VOT measures are con-
sidered in the context of production patterns we would ex-
pect from a Spanish(L1)-English(L2) speaker in Spanish and
in English respectively. As noted in this section, bilingual
speaker production of vowels ad stops are influenced by their
language background and therefore have production patterns
distinct from a monolingual speaker.
2.2.1. Bilingual Phonetic Alignment
Bilingual phonetic alignment is influenced by factors such as
language-specific phonetic limitations, language dominance,
and language attitudes [50, 51, 52, 53].
Sancier and Fowler [54] found that a Brazilian Portuguese-
English bilingual speaker varied their VOT in both languages
to align with an interlocutor, but speech production favored the
speaker’s dominant language or which language they most re-
cently used. Tobin et al. [52] recorded Spanish(L1) speakers
saying both Spanish and English sentences after living in an
English-only environment and then after living in a Spanish-
only environment. Results showed that participant English
VOTs drifted closer to VOTs typical of the ambient language
but participant Spanish VOTs did not. Bilingual speakers also
have been shown to align cross-dialectally, as in a study of L1
French speakers and regiolects of Belgium [37].
This study focuses on Spanish dominant, Spanish(L1)-
English(L2) speakers as a means of mitigating how some of
these sociolinguistic factors impact results. We expect conver-
gence in both languages in our study, but convergence patterns
for this study’s participants may be influenced by Spanish dom-
inance.
2.2.2. Phonetic Alignment to Synthetic Voices
For this study, bilingual speakers will complete the shadowing
task in English and Spanish to both human and synthetic voices.
Work by Zellou et al. [8] on phonetic alignment to voice assis-
tant (synthetic) voices showed that humans will align to non-
human voices generated by text-to-speech software. English
speakers converged to voice assistant voices regardless of par-
2262
ticipant age and gender [8]. Gessinger et al. [55] found that Ger-
man speakers aligned to synthetic voices during sentence-level
shadowing tasks. Participants converged in terms of amplitude,
prosody, and allophonic variation. Magnitude of convergence
effects were smaller in the human-machine context than in the
human-human context. Both Zellou et al. [8] and Gessinger et
al. [55] focused on contexts where participants speak in their
dominant language and/or are monolingual speakers. In our
present study, we expect convergence to both human and ma-
chine voices, but the magnitude of convergence to be stronger
in response to human voices in both languages.
3. The Current Study
This paper focuses specifically on Spanish(L1)-English(L2)
bilingual speakers in Mexico. About 65% of the popula-
tion of Mexico are projected to be daily smartphone users,
which are voice assistant enabled [56]. As described in Sec-
tion 2, phonetic alignment happens within one language, cross-
linguistically, and with synthetic voices. We build on this foun-
dational literature to explore how language background and in-
terlocutor status as human or voice assistant impacts phonetic
alignment results.
We conducted an online lexical shadowing task in which
Spanish(L1)-English(L2) bilingual participants (N=50) say a
list of words and then repeat the same words after hearing each
word said by either a human or voice assistant voice. Tri-
als occurred in Spanish and English. We predict participants
will converge to both human and machine voices, possibly due
to anthropomorphism of voice assistants (as discussed in Sec-
tion 2.1). While Nass et al.’s [3] CASA paradigm would suggest
these systems can be perceived as active conversational part-
ners, we anticipate a stronger magnitude of convergence to hu-
man voices than machine voices in line with Gessinger et al.’s
[55] findings. This difference in magnitude would suggest that
while people accept synthetic voices as human-like, they are
still not perceived as human.
Lexical shadowing task results allow examination of par-
ticipant speech production in a controlled environment where
conversational complexity and social dynamics are minimized.
In this controlled environment, we can compare the influence
of human versus voice assistant stimulus talker on convergence
patterns. Effects found in lexical shadowing tasks demonstrate
how humans perceive distinct interlocutors.
We also collected self-reported participant experiences with
and attitudes towards voice assistants via a brief survey follow-
ing the lexical shadowing task. Survey questions focused on
demographics, language usage, device usage, and sentiment to-
ward voice assistants, allowing for more accurate descriptions
of participants. Some of the information from the survey (rat-
ings for being understood or understanding voice assistants in
either language, participant gender, and participant dialectal re-
gion) will be used as predictors in our analyses to explore how
socially relevant factors mitigated effects of language and con-
dition on convergence. Participant gender and dialect are both
social factors that impact phonetic alignment patterns [36, 37].
Given unbalanced intelligibility ratings (ratings for being un-
derstood or understanding voice assistants in either language)
shown in Section 4.1.3, these factors were also tested as miti-
gating language and condition effects on convergence since neg-
ative perceptions of an interlocutor reduce convergence [27].
4. Methodology
The following methodology was approved by the institutional
review board at the authors’ university. Participants completed
a lexical shadowing task, followed by a brief sentiment and de-
mographic survey. The experiment was developed using ex-
perimental software PsychoPy [57] and hosted online using
Pavlovia.org.
4.1. Participants
In total, 67 participants were recruited for this online study via
Prolific. Participants were Mexico residents, Spanish-English
bilingual speakers, and used smart devices in their homes (e.g.
Amazon Echo, Google Home, Alexa, Siri). All participants
self-reported to be dominant in Spanish (see Section 4.1.2 for
more information about participant language usage). Each par-
ticipant was paid at a rate of $16 per hour. The experiment took
an average of 19 minutes to complete.
All recordings were manually reviewed by the first author
for audio quality. A total of 17 participants were excluded
from the final dataset due to excess background noise, failing
to record during the prompted time, and participant error in en-
suring their technology would enable recording online.
4.1.1. Demographic Information
Participants were evenly split between identifying as either
male and female and as either Mestizo (of mixed ancestry) or
Blanco-Mexicano (of European ancestry). Participants were
ages 20-39, with a mean age of 30.
Participants also identified in which dialectal region of
Mexico they resided. People who speak coastal dialects in Mex-
ico typically drop /s/ sounds in syllable-final position, which
can lead to longer vowel duration [58]. For example, “chisme”
is pronounced as [Ùisme] in a non-coastal dialect but [Ùime]
in a coastal dialect. Qualitatively, this distinction was audibly
present in the data. 32 of the participants resided in non-coastal
regions of Mexico, 14 resided in coastal regions, and 4 chose
not to disclose.
4.1.2. Language Usage
Participants were Spanish-English bilingual speakers who self-
identified as native (L1) Spanish speakers and second language
(L2) English speakers who primarily use Spanish in their daily
lives. All participants learned Spanish by age 3. Participants
learned English before age 18 (mean age = 7, SD = 4.25). None
of the participants who said they learned or acquired Spanish
by 3 years old indicated they learned or acquired English before
Spanish. There were two participants who said they were native
(Age 0) in both Spanish and English. 92% of participants said
they speak to their friends in Spanish most of the time. 98% of
participants said they speak to their family in Spanish most of
the time.
4.1.3. Device Usage
Majority of participants (68%) use a voice assistant daily. 22%
of participants use a voice assistant weekly, 8% monthly, and
2% never. Over half (52%) of participants have their voice as-
sistant configured in Spanish, 28% switch between Spanish and
English, and 16% in English. 4% did not share their voice as-
sistant configuration preferences.
Figure 1 shows the ratings from the survey’s intelligibility
questions which were how well participants feel understood by
2263
voice assistants in each language and how well they feel voice
assistants understand them in each language. Participants rated
on a scale of 1 - 6, where 1 means “does not understand” and 6
means “perfectly understand”. 46% of participants felt perfectly
understood by voice assistants in Spanish (Understood in
Spanish) and only 20% felt perfectly understood by voice
assistants in English (Understood in English). 48%
of participants said they perfectly understand the voice as-
sistants in Spanish (Understand Spanish VA) and 76%
said they perfectly understand the voice assistants in English
(Understand English VA).
Results for Spanish intelligibility are fairly even in both
user-to-assistant and assistant-to-user directions. Results in En-
glish are more unbalanced. Most participants said they have
almost no issues understanding voice assistants in English, as
seen by the lowest rating being a 4 and majority of rankings
being a 6. Comparatively, when saying how well they feel un-
derstood by the voice assistants in English, the lowest rating
was a 2 and few participants gave a rating of 6. These results
follow discussions in Section 1 around ASR-driven voice assis-
tants being biased toward SAE speakers in English. As seen
in Figure 1, participants gave the lowest ratings overall in the
Understood in Englishcase.
Figure 1:Intelligibility ratings by participants. The ratings are
how well participant feels they understand voice assistants and
how well participants feel understood by voice assistants(1 =
Worst, 6 = Best).
4.2. Stimuli
All stimuli talkers were adult and female-sounding. The En-
glish human talker was a native monolingual English speaker
from the United States, the Spanish human talker was a non-
coastal Mexican-Spanish/English bilingual speaker, the Span-
ish machine talker was Siri set to “Mexican-Spanish”, and the
English machine talker was Siri set to “US-English”.
There were 9 stimulus words chosen for each language to
control for tokens per language. Words were chosen with re-
gard to low frequency and high familiarity in order to mitigate
any knowledge gaps across participants which could impact re-
sults. Words were also chosen so the consonant immediately
before each target vowel was voiceless. Contrasting the voice-
less consonant with the voiced vowel during analysis created
more reliable acoustic measures. All consonants included in
the VOT analysis were voiceless stops.
4.2.1. English Stimuli
English words were chosen using the MRC Psycholinguistic
Database: Machine Usable Dictionary [59] and target vowels
reflect 9 English monophthongs. Low-frequency was deter-
mined relative to the Brown Verbal Frequency (BVF) score pro-
vided in the database. BVF scores for the entire database ranged
from 0-6,833. Chosen English stimuli yielded a mean BVF of
6, which corresponds to low frequency.
High familiarity was determined relative to the database
familiarity scores. Database familiarity ranges from 100-700,
with 100 corresponding to low familiarity and 700 correspond-
ing to high familiarity. Chosen English stimuli had a mean fa-
miliarity score of 587 and included the following:cook, cost,
cup, fat, hot, test, tooth, seat, sick.
English stimuli words were all monosyllabic. The target
vowel per word was therefore the only vowel in that word. En-
glish vowels analyzed were: /i,I,E, æ,O, u,U,2/. VOT analysis
includes all word-initial voiceless stops, /k, t/, as found incook,
cost, cup, test, tooth.
4.2.2. Spanish Stimuli
Spanish words were chosen using the SPALEX database [60].
Low frequency was determined relative to provided zipf scores
which ranged from 0.51 to 7.46, with 0.51 corresponding to
low frequency and 7.46 corresponding to high frequency. Span-
ish stimuli yielded a mean zipf score of 2.69. High familiar-
ity was determined relative to a provided prevalence score re-
flective of native Latin American knowledge of database terms.
Prevalence scores ranged from -2.27 to 2.576. Spanish stimuli
yielded a mean prevalence score of 2.34 and included the fol-
lowing:caspa, chisme, croqueta, lactosa, maceta, machismo,
mapache, mocoso, sustituta.
Target vowels in the Spanish stimuli were in the stressed
syllable of each word (see Table 1) and include /i, e, a, o, u/.
Spanish has a smaller vowel system than English. As such,
some Spanish vowels were repeated in the stimuli list to stan-
dardize the sample size part