Programmable Speech Synthesis without Computers 
Takayuki Arai 
Sophia Univ. (Japan) 
arai@sophia.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract 
We present mechanical speech synthesis devices based on 
dynamic physical models of the human vocal tract. The models 
consist of a main vocal tract, with or without nasal branches. 
The configuration of the main tract is controlled by six sliding 
blocks inserted from the bottom. To control the position of each 
block, we tested two cam mechanisms: linear cams and rotating 
cams. In both cases, the cam profile  determines the height of 
each block. Therefore, for each target phrase, the cam shapes 
must be redesigned. To make this process “programmable,” we 
developed a set of interchangeable plates with different profiles, 
allowing arbitrary cam shapes to be realized by inserting them 
into the base. This programmable approach allows the synthesis 
of multiple speech phrases using sliding-block-type vocal-tract 
models. 
Index Terms: speech production, vocal-tract models, speech 
dynamics, cam mechanisms, linear cams, rotating cams 
1. Introduction 
Umeda and Teranishi developed a mechanical model of human 
speech production to investigate the relation between phonemic 
and laryngeal characteristics [1]. This model has a main vocal 
tract with a nasal tract as a side branch. The vocal -tract 
configuration could be  adjusted by sliding a set of blocks 
inserted from the sides. The model was mainly used to produce 
steady-state vowels, as it was difficult to manipulate multiple 
blocks simultaneously to reproduce speech dynamics. Later, a 
variant of their mechanical model was further modified, so that 
a PC could control the positions of the inserted blocks [2]. This 
PC-controlled model allows us to synthesize words and phrases 
because the movements of the actuator-based control system 
are fast enough to produce both vowels and consonants. In 2024 
and 2025, new versions of the Umeda and Teranishi’s model 
were developed: VTM-UT45-D6, VTM-UT30-D6, and VTM-
UT30-D9 [3, 4]. The structure of the VTM -UT series is 
essentially the same as that of the original model; six blocks are 
inserted from the bottom of the vocal tract (hereafter referred to 
as “articulation blocks”). The difference between VTM -UT45 
and VTM -UT30 lies in size, with the latter having smaller 
dimensions. Furthermore, the D9 model includes a  nasal tract, 
as shown in Fig. 1(a), whereas the D6 model does not. 
To control the positions of the six articulation blocks in the 
VTM-UT30-D6/D9 models, we did not use computers or 
actuators. Instead, cam mechanisms were u sed to control their 
positions. Two types of cams  were used : linear cams and 
rotating cams. The linear cams have straight profiles with small 
up-and-down variations, each set designed for a specific phrase. 
When the cams set on a base plate slide linearly beneath the 
articulation blocks, the blocks are raised or lowered depending 
on the cam profile s. The rotating cams, on the other hand, are 
irregularly shaped discs . When th ese cams rotate be neath the 
articulation blocks, the blocks are raised or lowered depending 
on the cam profile s. In the both cases, a fixed set of ca ms 
corresponds to a specific phrase. Thus, different sets are 
required for different phrases. 
Recently, we have started developing programmable cams 
that consist of a base plate or base axis and multiple 
interchangeable plate pieces with different shapes . The first  
attempt using linear cams was reported in [5]. In this study, we 
first discuss programmable linear cams  and t hen extend the 
same approach to rotating cams. 
2. Two types of cams 
In this section, two types of cam mechanisms are described: 
linear cams and rotating cams. 
2.1. Linear cams 
Figure 1( b) shows plate pieces inserted into the base plate, 
forming a linear profile along its length for each articulation 
block of the vocal-tract model. The plate pieces have different 
shapes and can be categorized into t hree groups: right -angled 
triangles, rectangles, and others. 
The first group consists of  right-angled triangles. These 
pieces are used to  raise or lower the articulation blocks. The 
articulatory target for  each block has a  maximum value of 20 
mm. This value is determined by the height of the main vocal 
tract in the VTM-UT30-D6/D9 models. Using 20-mm “ramp” 
triangles, the corresponding articulation block reaches the 
“ceiling” of the palate or the pharyngeal wall. The height of 
these right-angled triangles can be varied between 0 and 20 mm. 
A height of 18 mm is often used to achieve a high degree of 
constriction in the  vocal tract. For a m oderate articulatory 
height, 10 mm is also used. Please note that all pieces have 
rectangular bottoms with a height of 5 mm, which are necessary 
for insertion into the base plate. 
 
 
Figure 1: The VTM-UT30-D9 model: 
(a) main part, (b) rotating cams, and (c) linear cams. 
872
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia

 
Figure 2: Diagrams of cam displacements. The horizontal axis 
represents normalized time, and the vertical axis shows the 
displacement as a function of time for each cam. 
 
 
Figure 3: Spectrograms of sounds produced by the VTM-
UT30- D6/D9 models using linear cams (left) and rotating 
cams (right). 
 
 
The second group consist s of rectangles. These pieces are 
used to keep the articulation blocks at the same level. The height 
of the rectangles can be varied between 0 and 20 mm. A height 
of 20 mm is used to achieve complete closure of an articulation 
block, whereas a height of 18 m m is used to achieve a high 
degree of constriction. A height of 10 mm is used for a moderate 
acritulatory constriction. Again, all pieces include bottom parts 
with a height of 5  mm, which adds an additional 5 mm to the  
total height. 
The third group  consists of various  irregular shapes. For 
example, when an articulation block needs to move from a 
height of 10 mm to 18 mm, or vice versa, a trapezoidal shape is 
used. Depending of the target phrases, different shapes are 
required. 
2.2. Rotating cams 
Figure 1( c) shows plate pieces inserted into the base axis, 
forming a rotating cam profile along its circumference for each 
articulation block of the vocal -tract model. The plate pieces 
have different shapes and can be categorized into three groups: 
ramped shape s, a nnular sector s, and others. The first group 
consists of  ramped shape s, corresponding to the right -angled 
triangles used in the linear cams. The second group consists of 
annular sectors, corresponding to the rectangular pieces used in 
the linear cams. T he t hird group  includes various  irregular 
shapes, as in the case of the linear cams. 
 
3. Experiments 
The same phrase was synthesiz ed using the two types of cam 
mechanisms. The English phrase “I love you” was selected as 
the target phrase and synthesized in two ways. Figure 2 shows 
cam displacement trajectories as a function of time. The time 
axis is normalized, so that the total duration is 1.0. The vertical 
axis shows the displacement of each cam as a function of time, 
where Cams 1 through 6 correspond to articulators from the lips 
to the glottal end. Figure 3 shows spectrograms of the phrase  
mechanically synthesized using the two methods: (a) linear 
cams and (b) rotating cams.  The formant trajectories are 
broadly similar in both cases. 
4. Discussion and conclusions 
In this study, we demonstrated how vocal-tract models (VTM-
UT30-D6/D9) can produce a phrase without using computers. 
Furthermore, the target phrase was synthesiz ed using two 
difference types of programmable cam mechanisms: linear 
cams and rotating cams.  In each case, the cams were 
constructed by inserting plate pieces into either the base plate 
or the base axis. Because t he pieces can be attached and 
detached, the cam profiles are “programmable.”  
In the experiment, we synthesized  a single phrase. 
However, as long as “tract variables” trajectories  specified in 
Articulatory Phonology [6] are available, as shown in Fig. 2, 
arbitrary phrases  can be synthesized  through their 
implementation in the Task Dynamics framework [7] . 
Furthermore, the linear and rotating cams produce nearly 
identical output sounds. Future work should investigate how to 
design tract -variable trajectories for a given phrase more 
systematically. 
5. Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant No. 
24K06423 and Sophia University Special Grant for Academic 
Research (Research in Priority Areas). 
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure 
No Generative AI was used for the preparation of this 
manuscript.