Articulatory Dynamics using Physical Vocal-tract Models 
Takayuki Arai 
Sophia University, Japan 
arai@sophia.ac.jp 
 
Abstract 
Visualizing and modeling the vocal tract during speech 
production is crucial in several speech-related areas, including 
phonetics and phonology, education in phonetics and speech 
science, and speech pathology. Once the observation and 
analysis are done, it becomes crucial to evaluate the 
“synthesized” speech outputs from the model. While speech 
synthesis is often performed on a computer, physical vocal-tract 
models provide an alternative and intuitive approach.  Some 
physical models are static and their configurations cannot be 
altered. Others are dynamic, allowing us to change their 
configurations and easily adjust the articulatory parameters. 
Here, a physically dynamic model was tested to p roduce given 
words with different sets of articulatory timings. The model was 
able to show dynamic aspects of speech from the articulatory 
phonology point of view. 
Index Terms: speech production, vocal -tract models, speech 
dynamics, articulatory phonology 
1. Introduction 
Several techniques of visualizing and modeling the human 
vocal tract are now available to speech science. In the modern 
era, the first 3 -dimensional measurements of static vocal -tract 
configurations on vowels were made by Chiba and Kajiyama 
(1941–42) [1]. They used a state-of-the-art X-ray apparatus for 
that time and even made plasticine-based models based on their 
measurements, showing t hat the specific configuration 
corresponded with the acoustic characteristics for each vowel. 
More recently, magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI, has 
been utilized for the same purpose, and researchers have built  
and tested  computer--simulated and/or measure d physical 
models. In particular, Baer et al. (1991) used MRI to analyze 
vocal-tract shapes and dimensions, especially for static vowels 
[2]. Moore (1992) looked at the correspondence of vocal tract 
resonance with volumes obtained from MR  images [3]. Dang, 
Honda and Suzuki (1994)  focused on the nasal and the 
paranasal cavities  and compared their m orphological and 
acoustic properties [4]. Narayanan, Alwan and Haker (1995)  
conducted an articulatory study of approximant  consonants 
using MRI [ 5]. Takemoto et al.  (2013) investigated acoustic 
interaction between the right and left piriform fossae in 
generating spectral dips  [6]. Yoshinaga et al.  (2021) made a 
simplified model for the v ocal tract of fricatives with inclined 
incisors [7]. Birkholz et al. (2020) measured three-dimensional 
vocal-tract shapes from MRI data and studied their acoustic 
properties as well as aerodynamic aspects [8]. Thus, it is clear 
that physical models have often been used in combination with 
MRI data for research purpos es. An advantage of using 
mechanical models is their intuitiveness; moreover, setting their 
conditions and parameters is often more straight -forward than 
in a computer model . Thus, physical models are still useful 
along with computer models for vowels and consonants. 
On the other hand, dynamic aspects of speech production 
have been studied for a long time. Cineradiography was utilized 
in early speech production studies, such as Perkell (1969) [9]. 
This technique provide s detailed anatomical data, although i t 
exposes speakers to X-rays for a certain time period. To 
minimize exposure, a technique based on an X-ray microbeam 
was subsequently developed and applied to  measurements of 
speech dynamics [10]. In this technique, a metal sens or, or 
pellet, is placed on each articulator, and the X -rays only 
irradiate the vicinity of the area of interest. Similar data can be 
obtained by electromagnetic midsagittal articulography 
(EMMA) [11] or electromagnetic articulography (EMA) [12]. 
In this case, electromagnetic induction is used to detect the 
positions of the sensors. These days, real-time MRI can be used 
to visualize speech dynamics at  a reasonably fast frame rate 
[13,14]. Another technique to measure dynamic aspects of 
speech production is ultrasound imaging [15]. Thus, several 
measuring and imaging techniques can be used to make  
observations of dynamic movements of articulation during 
speech production. 
After measuring the vocal -tract configurations, it is also 
important to synthesize speech based on the me asurements. 
Articulatory synthesizers, such as Maeda’s model [16], have 
allowed us to achieve this goal. In addition, dynamic versions 
of physical models of the human vocal tract can be used for the 
same purpose. Some dynamic models were available for past 
studies. Speaking robots (e.g., [17– 20]) are machines whose  
mechanical parts and actuators mimic articulatory movements. 
Some of these dynamic models include a PC-controlled Umeda 
and Teranishi model [21], a gel -type flexible tongue models 
without a mandible [22], with a fixed mandible [23] and with a 
movable mandible [24], a BMW model [25], BMW -RL model 
[26], and BMW-DN model [27]. 
Articulatory Phonology (AP), originally proposed by 
Browman and Goldstein [28, 29 ], is a theoretical framework 
that represent s speech production in terms of articulatory 
gestures. In AP, gestures are defined as abstract task-level units 
specifying constriction goals and locations within the vocal 
tract. The physical implementation of these gestures is 
described within the Task D ynamics (TD) framework [3 0], 
which models how coordinated articulatory actions are 
organized to achieve intended constrictions. Speech utterances 
are represented as gestural scores that specify the temporal 
organization, activation, and coordination of mul tiple gestures 
rather than articulator positions per se. One of the major 
contributions of AP is its account of coarticulation, which is not 
treated as a separate process but emerges naturally from the 
temporal overlap and interaction of independently spec ified 
gestures [29]. AP has successfully explained a wide range of 
speech-production phenomena. From the perspective of AP, 
programmable physical models of the vocal tract provide a 
useful platform for implementing gesture-like constrictions and 
investigating how the temporal coordination and overlap of 
gestures influence the resulting acoustic output. 
To achieve speech synthesis by using physical models of 
the human vocal tract from the perspective of AP /TD, we 
focused on versions of the Umeda and Teranishi model, i.e., the 
VTM-UT-D6/D9 models [31 , 3 2]. The VTM-UT series of 
models was introduced in 2015 [21]. Several blocks are inserted 
into the main vocal tract of the model, and the position of each 
block is adjustable. Recent mod els have cam mechanisms  to 
control the degree of constriction of each block. Both linear 
cams and rotating cams a re implemented. O ne of the 
advantages of using rotating cams is that they enable repetitive 
synthesis of a phrase. On the other hand, phrases of different 
durations can easily be implemented  with the linear cam s. In 
addition, linear cams more or less correspond well with gestural 
scores in AP/TD [33]. 
 
7133
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-840
 
 
Figure 1: VTM-UT30-D9 model: (a) main part, (b) rotating 
cams, and (c) linear cams. 
 
However, how well the VTM -UT30-D9 model  simulates 
articulatory dynamics is not well studied. Here, we decided to 
use this  model to study several sound sequences. First, we 
tested a coarticulation phenomenon in terms of nasalization. 
Second, we combined linear cams with the model to represent 
gestural scores and discussed its results from the AP/TD point 
of view. 
2. Models and cams 
The vocal-tract model used in this study was  VTM-UT30-D9 
[32]. Figure 1 shows a VTM-UT30-D9 and rotating/linear 
cams. The linear cams are “programmable” and consist of small 
plates with different shapes.  The first and brief demonstration 
of combining VTM-UT30-D9 with linear cams was at the Joint 
Meeting of the Acoustical Societies of America and Japan, in 
2025 [33]. The present study is the first one to conduct detailed 
experiments. 
2.1. VTM-UT-D6/D9 models 
The VTM-UT30-D6 and D9 models each have a straight vocal 
tract, of which the configuration can be changed by moving six 
black blocks in Fig. 1(a). These blocks can be moved manually 
for quick demonstrations, as well as with the cam mechanisms 
for more precise control. The blocks are made of 
polyoxymethylene to minimize friction between them. Because 
each block has a certain amount of brass inside, this additional 
weight helps each block to accelerate and fall under gravity. 
As shown in Fig. 1, sounds are output from the right-hand 
side. The right-most block acts as the  lower lip. When this  lip 
block is raised, it simulates lip protrusion or lip rounding, 
because the lip aperture gets smaller. Th e lip block is 10-mm 
wide, whereas the other five blocks are 20 -mm wide. The 
second block from the right in this figure corresponds to the 
tongue bl ade, so when this block is raised, it simulates a 
constriction at the alveolar position. Likewise, the third and 
fourth blocks from the right correspond to the tongue body or 
dorsum positions, so when these blocks are raised, it simulates 
a constriction at  the postalveolar/velar position. The last two 
blocks correspond to the tongue root, and when these blocks are 
raised, it simulates a constriction in the pharyngeal cavity. The 
distance between the top surface of each block and the 
corresponding palate part is 20 mm. 
The major difference between the D6 and D9 models is that 
D6 does not have a  nasal cavity. D9 includes a side branch on 
the front part of the oral cavity. A dial is connected to a small 
valve, which behaves as a port to control the degree of 
nasopharyngeal coupling. 
2.2. Cam mechanisms 
Although the blocks of  the VTM-UT30-D6/D9 models can be 
manipulated manually for demonstrations in educational 
settings, the cam mechanisms can  manipulate the positions of 
the blocks precisely. There are two types of cam that we have 
utilized so far, and they each have advantages. 
2.2.1. Rotating cams 
A sample set of rotating cam mechanisms is shown in Fig. 1(b). 
In this figure, a shaft passes through six discs, each of which 
corresponds to a block of the models. Because the discs have 
uneven rounded shapes, they push up the blocks to certain 
heights at certain timings when the shaft is rotated. Phrases 
produced by the models are determined by their shapes, which 
are programmable. 
2.2.2. Linear cams 
A sample set o f linear cam mechanisms is shown in Fig. 1(c). 
In this figure, the base plate has six grooves along the length of 
the plate. In each groove, small plates are placed to form the 
linear cams. The shape of each piece of plates varies depending 
on the function. For the onset of a constriction in a vocal tract, 
a rising ramp pattern is needed and a piece with a right-triangle 
shape is designed. The same piece can be used for  offset of a 
constriction by flipping its direction left to right. To  keep the 
same degree of constriction, a steady-state pattern is needed and 
a piece with a rectangular shape is designed for this purpose. 
3. Experiments 
We utilized the VTM-UT30-D9 model to examine how specific 
sequences of sounds are produced in several systematic 
conditions. 
3.1. Word pair of Bob vs. bomb 
The first experiment focused on the  word pair “Bob” vs. 
“bomb,” which are pronounced as [bɑb] and [bɑm] in American 
English. These words consist of a consonant [b], a vowel [ ɑ], 
and a consonant [m]. 
 
Figure 2: Gestural scores of tract variables for [bab] and 
[bam]. 
Figure 3: Spectrograms of [bab] and [bam]. 
 
 
Figure 4: Frequency characteristics of vowel [a] with different 
degrees of nasalization. 
7134
3.2. Word pair of Bob vs. bomb 
The first experiment focused on the  word pair “Bob” vs. 
“bomb,” which are pronounced as [bɑb] and [bɑm] in American 
English. These words consist of a consonant [b], a vowel [ ɑ], 
and a consonant [m]. 
3.2.1. Articulatory gestures 
The onset consonant [b] is  a voiced bilabial one and it is 
achieved by pressing the upper and lower lips together. A ir is 
trapped inside the oral cavity during the closure  and it is 
released when the lips are open ed. The [b] sound can be 
produced with VTM -UT30-D9 by raising the lip block 
completely (20 mm height), holding it for a short period of time, 
and then abruptly releasing the block. The vowel in the nucleus 
position is [ɑ], and this vowel is achieved by raising two of the 
left-most blocks by 18 mm and mak ing a constriction between 
the tongue root and the pharyngeal wa ll. While the coda 
consonant in “Bob” is [b], it is [m] in “bomb”; it is achieved by 
raising the lip block to make a complete oral closure as in the 
case of [b]. The major difference between [b] and [m] in terms 
of their articulation is the degree of velopharyngeal (VP) 
opening. For [b] , the VP port is completely closed, whereas  it 
is open for [m ]. VTM-UT30-D9 models the nasal cavity , and 
the degree of VP coupling can be controlled by rotating the dial 
shown in Fig. 1. 
The articulatory movements are summarized in Fig. 2 as 
gestural scores in AP/ TD. The horizontal axis is time, and the 
vertical axis shows the gestural scores of each tract variable as 
a function of time. There are four tract variables in this figure. 
LA stands for lip aperture and the negative sign shows that lips 
are closing as the absolute value of −LA increases. This variable 
increases and decreases twice with a short  plateau period  in 
between: one for the onset and the other for the coda. The 
maximum value of −LA was 20 mm. In what follows, TBCD 
stands for tongue body constriction degree , whereas TRCD 
stands for tongue root constriction degree, of which the values 
are high in both [bɑb] and [bɑm]. The maximum value of 
TRCD was 18 mm. VEL stands for velopharyngeal port and it 
was opened only during the second half of the word [bɑm], 
corresponding to the height of the velum. As can be seen in this 
figure, the VP port starts opening earlier than the actual starting 
time of [m], and the VP opening is more gradual than other 
articulator movements. As a result, the vowel [ ɑ] is gradually 
nasalized as the VP opens. This is an example of overlapping 
gestures and it causes “co-articulation” [35]. 
3.2.2. Measurements 
We recorded several sets of [bɑb] and [bɑm] by  operating the 
VTM-UT30-D9 model with linear cams or manually. Figure 3 
shows th e resulting  spectrograms with formant trajectories 
estimated by WaveSurfer (ver. 1.8.8p5). In both utterances, the 
formants ris e at the beginning of the vowel parts. The main 
difference between these utterances occurs when the VP opens 
during the vowel of [bɑm]. Some anti -formants in the spectra 
reflect pole-zero pairs appear ing in the vocal -tract transfer 
function. As a result, the second part of the vowel in [bɑm] 
becomes nasalized. 
To investigate the frequency characteristics of this vowel 
nasalization in more detail, we measured the impulse responses 
of the VTM-UT30-D9 model with the vocal-tract configuration 
of the vowel [ ɑ] and different degrees of nasalization. To 
achieve [ɑ], two of the left-most blocks in Fig. 1 were raised, so 
that the constriction between the palate roof and t he surface of 
the blocks was 2 mm. The  remaining blocks were maximally 
opened. For different degrees of nasalization, the dial was 
rotated to control the VP coupling. The first step was  with the 
VP is completely closed. We initially set the rotation angle of 
the dial to 0 degrees , and then rotated the dial in 15 degree 
intervals up to 45 degrees. 
For th e measurements, a microphone was placed at the 
glottal end and a swept -sine signal was fed from the mouth 
opening and the nostril . The swept -sine signal was 65,536 
samples long with a sampling frequency of 48 kHz. We played 
the signal through a loudspeaker (NOE, full-range type), which 
was placed in front of the model, via an audio interface (RME, 
FireFace UC) and power amplifier (ClassicPro, DCP 30 mini). 
We recorded the sound signal with a 1/4 -inch microphone 
(BSWA, MPA416) and an amplifier (Easy Measure, MM-ICP-
Pro) and stored it on a PC via an audio interface (RME, 
FireFace UC) with a sampling frequency of 48 kHz. The 
recorded signals were synchronously ave raged multiple times 
to obtain a higher signal-to-noise ratio. 
Figure 4 shows the frequency characteristics of the vowel 
[ɑ] with four different degrees: (a) 0°, 15°, 30°, and 45°. As can 
be seen, sets of pole -zero pairs were gradually inserted as the 
VP coupling increased. Interestingly, the first formant (F1) is 
canceled out by the inserted zero, with  the lowest pole 
becoming the new F1, as mentioned in [3 6]. Even though this 
formant shifted, we still heard the vowel as [ ɑ], which is a 
perceptual compensation effect of coarticulation [35,37]. 
3.3. Nonsense word “abra” 
The second experiment focused on a nonsense word “abra.” We 
targeted an English pronunciation of [ɑbɹɑ]. This word consists 
of a consona nt cluster /br/ and a vowel /a/. W e utilized the 
VTM-UT30-D9 model with different sets of linear cams and 
tested how gestural scores are implemented as linear cams and 
how vowel epenthesis is represented in a systematic way. 
3.3.1. Articulatory gestures 
All the vowels in this sequence w ere [ɑ], and two of the left-
most blocks were raised all  of the time. The consonants of the 
sequence were [b] and [ɹ], and they form a consonant cluster in 
English. Again, the voiced bilabial consonant was achieved by 
raising the lip block completely and then abrupt ly releasing it. 
The second consonant [ ɹ] is a voiced alveolar (and often 
retroflex) approximant in English and is achieved by raising the 
tongue tip toward the alveolar or postalveolar region (retroflex 
configuration). The /r/ sound in English is often ac hieved by 
bunching the tongue, called a bunched /r/ [34 ]. It is more 
appropriate for VTM-UT30-D6/D9 to produce the bunched /r/; 
here, the third block from the lips was raised to make a 
constriction at almost the same location as where bunching of 
the tongue maximally occurs. For such  /r/, the third formant 
(F3) frequency decreases, often to below 2 kHz. This low F3 is 
crucial for its perception. To assist in decreasing the F3 
frequency, there are two more places in the  vocal tract for 
constrictions. One is the lips , and the other is the pharyngeal 
cavity. Therefore, to enhance the /r/ sound, we set the lip and 
lingual gestures to overlap during /r/. 
The articulatory movements are summarized in Fig. 5 as 
gestural scores. The tract variable −LA increases and decreases 
with a short plateau corresponding to [b]. The maximum value 
of −LA was 20 mm. After onset of [b], TBCD increased and 
then decreased for [ɹ]. TRCD remained high all the time. This 
was because the two vowels were both [ ɑ] and the narrow 
constriction between the tongue root and the pharyngeal wall 
persisted during the consonant cluster /br/ . The maximum 
values of TBCD and TRCD were both 18 mm. V EL was zero 
because there was no nasalization. 
3.3.2. Measurements 
Using theVTM-UT30-D9 model, we recorded 80 repetitions of 
[ɑbɹɑ] under several linear cam conditions. The first step, or 
Step 0, is shown in Fig. 1(c) where the distance d between the 
onsets of −LA and TBCD was 30 mm. With each step number 
increment, d was increased by 3 mm up to 51 mm. There were 
eight steps altogether, and ten repetitions were made in each 
step. 
 
7135
 
Figure 5: Gestural scores of tract variables for [abɹa]. 
 
 
Figure 6: Spectrograms of [abɹa] in Step 0 and Step 7. 
 
 
Figure 7: Rate in percent of how many times a consonant 
cluster was recognized (error bars represent 95% confidence 
intervals). 
 
Figure 6 show spectrograms of [ɑbɹɑ] of Step 0 and Step 7 
with formant trajectories estimated by WaveSurfer (ver. 
1.8.8p5). The formant trajectories are clear ly shown in both 
utterances representing these sequences.  Comparing these 
utterances, the only difference was the timing of tongue body 
movement in Step 0 and Step 7. In Step 7, because this timing 
is relatively late, a vowel-like segment can be observed between 
the first half of the word, i.e., the [ɑb] sequence, and the second 
half, i.e., the [ɹɑ] sequence. 
We tested how well an automatic speech recognition system 
could identify the inserted vowel of these utterances from Step 
0 through Step 7 above. We used the function “speech2text” in 
Matlab (R2025b), which uses the wav2vec 2.0 model internally. 
The language mode of this function was “english.” Figure 7 
shows the percentage of  times the system recognized a 
consonant cluster. T his figure indicates vowel insertion  were 
not recognized in Step 0 and Step 1, whereas they were 
recognized at a rate of 100% in Step 6 and Step 7. 
3.3.3. Statistical analysis 
All statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS Statistics 26 
(IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) and a two-tailed significance 
level of α = 0.05. Because each trial outcome was binary (0/1), 
analyses were performed at the individual response level ( N = 
80). To examine whether the proportion of correct responses 
decreased monotonically across ordered condition steps, a 
Cochran–Armitage trend test (linear-by-linear association) was 
used to assess systematic changes in  binary outcomes across 
ordinal steps. 
Next, to examine whether performance declined gradually 
or exhibited abrupt transitions, adjacent-step comparisons were 
conducted using Fisher’s exact test. Because seven pairwise 
comparisons were performed (Step 0  vs. 1 through Step 6 vs. 
7), a Bonferroni correction was applied to adjust the multiple 
comparisons. 
As for the results, first, the proportion of correct responses 
across the eight steps showed a non-linear pattern. Steps 0  and 
1 demonstrated ceiling performance (100%), whereas Steps 6  
and 7 showed floor performance (0%). Accuracy declined 
sharply from Step 2  onward, indicating an abrupt rather than 
gradual transition. The Cochran–Armitage test demonstrated a 
highly significant monotonic decrease in correct responses 
across steps (χ² = 42.538, p < 0.001), providing strong evidence 
that the probability of correct responses declined as the step 
number increased.  Fisher’s exact tests between neighboring 
steps showed that only Step 1 vs. Step 2 was significant (10/10 
vs. 3/10; Bonferroni -adjusted p = 0.021). All other adjacent 
comparisons were non-significant. 
4. Discussion and conclusions 
In this study, we tested a physical but dynamic model , VTM-
UT30-D9, in producing several different utterances. This model 
has movable blocks, each of which corresponds to a different 
articulator of a vocal tract. It also has a nasal cavity with a dial 
controlling the degree of VP coupling; therefore, it can produce 
different degrees of nasalization. 
In the first experiment, we produced [b ɑb] and [bɑm]. For 
these words, gestural scores of the tract variables were set, and 
the utterances were measure on the basis of the scores. The 
measurements indicated  that the gestural scores are not only 
intuitive but also practical for  representing dynamic aspects of 
speech articulation. We further tested whether the model could 
produce a co-articulation effect of nasalization before the coda 
nasal. The frequency characteristics based on the impulse 
response measurements clearly showed the nasal formants and 
anti-formants as the degree of VP coupling increased. 
In the second experiment, we tested the sequence [ab ɹa] 
with different timings. Especially, the onset timing of [ ɹ] was 
gradually delayed from Step 0 through Step 7. As a result, a 
schwa was inserted between [b] and [ɹ]. This inserted schwa can 
be considered to be  “the targetless schwa”  discuss