Audio-KWS-Gated Error Memory Retrieval for Incremental ASR
Post-Correction
Taira Ashikawa1, Daichi Hayakawa 1, Takehiko Kagoshima1, Tomoki Watanabe1
1 Corporate Laboratory, Toshiba Corporation, Japan
taira.ashikawa.f40@mail.toshiba, daichi.hayakawa.r26@mail.toshiba,
takehiko.kagoshima.r78@mail.toshiba, tomoki.watanabe.r70@mail.toshiba
Abstract
ASR has improved, yet rare and domain-specific terms remain
challenging. LLMs enable second-pass post-correction without
retraining an ASR model. In long-running use, correction logs
can be reused to fix recurring errors, but full-history prompting
is limited by the LLM context window, and text-only selection
is brittle when trigger terms are misrecognized. We propose an
incremental post-correction framework with Audio-KWS-gated
retrieval, where Audio-KWS detects keywords from audio to
select relevant correction records within the context window.
We proceed in three steps: (i) LLM-based error analysis extracts
correction pairs to update a keyword inventory, (ii) Audio-KWS
runs on audio to detect Top-N keywords and retrieve correction
records (using phonetic readings as keywords for Japanese), and
(iii) the LLM applies record-guided edits. On Earnings-21 and
CSJ, our method achieves about 70% prompt reduction (Top-
20 English; Top-10 Japanese) while improving WER/CER and
Bias-F1.
Index Terms: automatic speech recognition, post-transcription
correction, large language models, keyword spotting, prompt
compression
1. Introduction
End-to-end automatic speech recognition (ASR) has advanced
rapidly through large-scale training on diverse audio, enabling
robust generalization without dataset-specific fine-tuning [1, 2].
Despite these advances, ASR systems still struggle with rare
and domain-specific terms, such as technical terminology and
named entities [3].
A common remedy is domain adaptation, such as fine-
tuning or lexicon augmentation, but these approaches incur op-
erational costs and long iteration cycles, especially in dynamic
domains (e.g., finance and news, where new entities emerge
continuously) [4]. An alternative is inference-time contextu-
alization, in which domain terms are provided as prompts or
biasing lists to the ASR decoder to improve recall of rare words
[5]. However, these approaches are limited by prompt-length
constraints: as the domain vocabulary grows, many terms no
longer fit in the prompt or bias list. Moreover, large biasing lists
may also hurt accuracy, limiting scalable contextualization.
Recent progress in large language models (LLMs) has mo-
tivated ASR post-correction, where an LLM refines ASR hy-
potheses in a second pass without modifying the underlying
ASR system [6]. Complementary work has explored prompt-
ing strategies such as task-activating prompting (instructions
plus demonstrations), where few-shot in-context learning can
outperform zero-shot prompting [7]. In practical deployments,
incremental post-correction can reuse previously corrected con-
text, allowing a correction history (“error memory”, e.g., cor-
rection logs) to accumulate and support fixes for recurring er-
rors [8, 9]. However, the growing history quickly runs into the
LLM context window limit, making full-history prompting in-
creasingly costly and sometimes infeasible. Consequently, the
history must be filtered to records relevant to what was spoken
in the current audio segment.
In practice, selecting which correction records to reuse
based only on noisy ASR hypotheses can be brittle: when
the trigger term is misrecognized, text-driven retrieval may fail
to retrieve the needed records [10, 11]. This motivates us-
ing audio-grounded cues to select correction history, reducing
missed retrievals when the trigger term is corrupted in the hy-
pothesis.
To address this LLM context window bottleneck, we use
audio keyword spotting (Audio-KWS) as a retrieval cue, includ-
ing only correction records that are likely relevant to the current
utterance. By scoring a keyword inventory against the input au-
dio, Audio-KWS enables selective retrieval without full-history
prompting.
Contributions.
• We propose an incremental LLM-based ASR post-correction
framework that scales under the LLM context window limit
by using Audio-KWS-gated retrieval to select utterance-
relevant correction records.
• We derive a dynamically expanding keyword inventory from
LLM-based error analysis, indexing both canonical forms
and misrecognized variants; for Japanese, we index phonetic
readings to support robust retrieval.
• We evaluate on Earnings-21 (English) and CSJ (Japanese),
showing substantial prompt-length reduction while preserv-
ing or improving post-correction accuracy and bias-word re-
covery.
2. Related Work
2.1. LLM-based Post-Correction
ASR post-correction refines an ASR hypothesis in text space
to improve readability and accuracy without modifying the un-
derlying ASR model. LLMs can serve as practical second-pass
correctors even when the ASR is only available as a black-box
service (e.g., contact-center transcripts) [4].
Prior work improves robustness by leveraging additional
ASR outputs (e.g., N-best lists) and by constraining the edit-
ing space, improving correction quality and controllability
[12, 13]. Other studies examine prompting strategies (e.g., task-
activating prompting) [7] and staged verification/validation to
mitigate hallucinations and over-correction [14]. Multi-turn
and incremental frameworks perform segment-wise correction
while carrying forward previously corrected context [8, 9].
4779
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-363
Scalability challenge (prompt growth). Reusing correction
history helps address recurring errors without retraining the
ASR model, but prompting with the full history increases cost
and can exceed the LLM context window limit in long-running
deployments.
Our position. Existing post-correction work improves quality
and controllability, but has not explicitly addressed how to reuse
an expanding correction history within the LLM context win-
dow. We address this by retrieving an utterance-relevant subset,
rather than prompting with the full history.
2.2. LLM Prompt Compression for ASR Post-Correction
Long-running LLM workflows often face prompt growth as
rules, examples, and history accumulate, increasing cost and
sometimes degrading behavior. Prompt compression and long-
term memory management aim to mitigate these issues [15, 16,
17, 18].
ASR-specific limitation of text-centric retrieval. In ASR
post-correction, deciding which correction-history records to
reuse should reflect what was spoken, yet selection is often
text-driven and relies on the noisy hypothesis. When the trig-
ger term is misrecognized, text-only retrieval can miss the rel-
evant correction-history records [11]. Phonetic and audio cues
can also help correction, especially for rare or domain-specific
terms [19].
Our position. Thus, while prompt compression and memory
methods are largely text-centric, we use audio-grounded cues
to retrieve an utterance-relevant subset of the correction history.
2.3. Audio-KWS and Contextual Biasing
Audio keyword spotting (Audio-KWS) detects target terms in
speech, and open-vocabulary variants support user-defined or
rapidly changing keywords via cross-modal audio-text match-
ing [20, 21, 22, 23].
ASR contextual biasing with Audio-KWS. Audio-KWS is
also related to contextual biasing in end-to-end ASR, where
providing term lists (e.g., named entities) can improve recall of
rare terms. For Whisper-style models, retrieval-based contex-
tual biasing and dynamic-vocabulary contextualization without
full retraining have been studied [5, 24, 25, 26, 27].
Our position. Prior KWS and contextual-biasing work mainly
targets first-pass decoding. In contrast, we select an utterance-
relevant subset of correction-history records for second-pass
LLM post-correction within the LLM context window limit,
using open-vocabulary Audio-KWS to gate retrieval and avoid
full-history prompting.
3. Proposed Method
We perform LLM-based ASR post-correction by using Audio-
KWS to retrieve an utterance-relevant subset of a growing cor-
rection history (error memory), keeping the prompt within the
LLM context window.
3.1. System Overview
Figure 1 summarizes our ASR post-correction pipeline. When
a human-corrected reference transcript becomes available for
a past segment (utterance), we run an LLM-based error analy-
sis on the ASR hypothesis and the reference transcript, append
a structured correction record to the error memory H and up-
date the keyword inventory V with an inverted index I that
links keywords to memory records. For each audio segment
ASRhypa/Referencerefa
“..each touch” / “..eTouch” LLM Error Analysis
Keyword InventoryV
each touch, eTouch, . . .
Error MemoryH
+ Inverted IndexI
hypa→ refa, . . .
audio t
“..eTouch.. ”
Audio-KWS
on inventoryV
Retrieve relevant
memory rows
ASR LLM Correct
corrt
“..eTouch.. ”
Kt
each touch
˜Ht hypa→ refahypt
“..each touch.. ”
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed ASR post-correction
pipeline with Audio-KWS-gated retrieval (gray: examples).
Algorithm 1 Incremental post-correction with Audio-KWS re-
trieval
1: fort = 1, 2,... do
2: if any corrected reference is newly available then
3: updateH and (V,I) via LLM-based error analysis
4: end if
5: hypt← ASR(audiot)
6: Kt← Audio-KWS(audiot,V)
7: ˜Ht← Retrieve(H,I,Kt)
8: ˜Ht← CapByRecency( ˜Ht,M )
9: corrt← LLM-Correct(hypt, ˜Ht)
10: end for
t, open-vocabulary Audio-KWS runs on audiot withV to de-
tect a small keyword set Kt. We then retrieve the associated
subset ˜Ht⊆H viaI and cap it to at most M records (most
recent first) to stay within the LLM context window. Finally,
we provide ˜Ht together with the current hypothesis hypt to
the LLM for constrained post-correction, producing corrt. Al-
gorithm 1 describes our incremental post-correction loop, and
Sections 3.2–3.4 describe each step in detail.
3.2. Error Analysis and Memory Update
We maintain an error memoryH as a collection of records pro-
duced by an LLM-based error analysis step. Given an ASR
hypothesis and a human-corrected reference, the LLM aligns
the two texts at token granularity and extracts span-level phrase
pairs (hyp span↔ ref phrase); the resulting record is appended
toH.
LLM prompt for error analysis. The LLM receives the hy-
pothesis and the reference with strict formatting and language-
specific instructions, and outputs a fixed-schema TSV after nor-
malization (case- and punctuation-insensitive). For English,
the alignment uses whitespace tokens; for Japanese, it uses
morpheme-level units. In both cases, each reference-side phrase
(primarily proper-noun phrases) is linked to the minimal con-
tiguous aligned hypothesis-side span as phrase pairs. The TSV
may also include lightweight error tags and token-level edit cues
used as auxiliary signals in post-correction.
What each memory record contains. Each record hi stores
the original hypothesis and reference strings, and the extracted
phrase pairs{(hyp span, ref phrase)} and auxiliary fields (error
4780
tags and token-level edit cues). For Japanese, we additionally
store phonetic readings for the phrase pairs (estimated by the
LLM) [28].
Japanese phonetic readings as a retrieval key. Japanese sur-
face forms often contain kanji, making audio-to-orthography
matching difficult. We therefore attach LLM-estimated pho-
netic readings to the aligned phrase pairs as retrieval keys.
These phonetic readings become the keywords inV for Audio-
KWS, while corrections are applied to the surface strings.
Keyword inventory and inverted index. For English, we in-
dex both reference-side phrases and their aligned hypothesis-
side variants; for Japanese, we index only phonetic readings
from both sides (reference and hypothesis). We build a key-
word inventoryV from the extracted phrase pairs and maintain
an inverted indexI that maps each keyword to its associated
records inH.
3.3. Audio-KWS-Gated Retrieval
Open-vocabulary Audio-KWS and keyword selection. To
decide which past memory records are relevant to the current
segment, we use open-vocabulary Audio-KWS. We instanti-
ate it with AdaKWS [22], which outputs a confidence score
s(p)∈ [0, 1] for each keyword p∈V givenaudiot. We treat
the keyword inventory as open by continuously expanding V
during error analysis. We form the detected keyword setKt us-
ing a two-stage policy: first, we retain keywords whose scores
exceed a threshold τ; then, we select the Top-N keywords by
score. We use a low threshold to avoid KWS misses (favoring
recall) and Top-N to bound the retrieved history asV grows.
Retrieving relevant error memory context. UsingKt, we re-
trieve a filtered subset of the error memory by collecting, via
the inverted indexI, the memory records associated with the
detected keywords, yielding ˜Ht. If Kt is empty, we fall back
to a bounded recent-history window and cap the context to at
most M records from ˜Ht by recency (most recent first) to fit
the LLM context window.
3.4. LLM Post-Correction
For each audio segmentt, the LLM receives the ASR hypothe-
sishypt and a compact error-memory subset ˜Ht⊆H retrieved
in Section 3.3. The goal is to rewritehypt into a corrected tran-
scriptcorrt under strict constraints: minimize deletions, avoid
paraphrasing or simplification, and preserve fillers.
LLM prompt for error correction. The retrieved error-
memory subset provides phrase-pair correspondences from past
corrections,{(hyp span, ref phrase)}, which we present to the
LLM as candidate replacements. We instruct the LLM to cor-
rect hypt by following the retrieved past examples, applying
these correspondences as record-grounded edit hints rather than
performing unconstrained rewriting. We prioritize phrase-pair
replacements for named entities and domain terms, and use aux-
iliary signals from the analysis TSV only to support conserva-
tive, record-guided edits. For Japanese, retrieval is keyed by
phonetic readings, but edits are applied to surface strings.
4. Experimental Setup
4.1. Evaluation Data
We evaluate on English Earnings-21 earnings-call transcripts
[3] and Japanese CSJ lecture-style spontaneous speech [29, 30].
On the subset of utterances containing at least one of the 20
bias-words (417 English and 442 Japanese utterances), we re-
port WER/CER and evaluate bias-word recovery. Bias-words
are proper nouns or technical terms that appear in the reference
transcripts but are frequently misrecognized by the ASR sys-
tem. A bias-word is considered present if it matches under the
same normalization used for evaluation (e.g., case-insensitive
matching and whitespace normalization). For each language,
we extract candidate terms that appear at least twice in the ref-
erences, rank them by how often they are not correctly realized
in the ASR output under the same matching criterion, and se-
lect the top 20. For Japanese, we additionally remove obvious
non-terms and canonicalize surface string variants.
4.2. Systems and Settings
We compare (i) No-KWS (w/o KWS), a capped recent-history
baseline that includes the most recentM records, and (ii) KWS
Top-N, which selects the Top-N keywords with scores above
τ and retrieves the associated records. Across all systems, we
cap the memory context included in the prompt to at most M
records, selected by recency (most recent first), to fit within the
LLM context window, withM = 200. We setτ = 10−4 to re-
duce false negatives and control the filtering strength primarily
via Top-N (N∈{ 1, 5, 10, 20, 30}).
ASR hypotheses. For Earnings-21, we use the publicly re-
leased ASR hypotheses provided with the dataset [31]. For CSJ,
we generate ASR hypotheses using Whisper-large-v3 [1, 32].
LLM setting. We use openai/gpt-oss-20b [33] for both error
analysis (Section 3.2) and post-correction (Section 3.4). We de-
code deterministically (temperature = 0.0) with a large gener-
ation cap (max completion tokens = 27000) to prevent trunca-
tion.
AdaKWS Training Data. We implement AdaKWS [22] and
train it as a binary classifier over (utterance audio, keyword
string) pairs. We use a frozen Whisper-medium encoder as the
audio front end [1, 34] , and train only the lightweight keyword-
conditioning and classification modules. Training data consist
of V oxPopuli (English) [35] and CSJ (Japanese) train dataset
[29]. V oxPopuli keywords are whitespace-delimited tokens ex-
tracted from normalized transcripts (len ≥ 4, count< 1000),
whereas CSJ pseudo-keywords are created by randomly seg-
menting each utterance’s phoneme sequence into 4–10-length
chunks. In both cases, we sample one positive keyword per ut-
terance and five random negatives from keywords not present in
the utterance.
4.3. Metrics
We report WER (English) and CER (Japanese) on the bias-
word utterance subset (Section 4.1). We compute these using
fstalign [36] with default settings (case-insensitive match-
ing). For bias-word recognition, we compute micro-averaged
precision/recall/F1 over occurrences of the 20 bias-words.
Prompt-length reduction definitions (micro/macro). Let
Lbase
i denote the prompt length of the No-KWS baseline (capped
to at most M records), and let Lsel
i denote the corresponding
length under each retrieval policy (also capped at M records).
We report two reduction measures
Prompt-Redmicro = 1−
Pn
i=1Lsel
iPn
i=1Lbase
i
, (1)
Prompt-Redmacro = 1
n
nX
i=1

1− Lsel
i
Lbase
i

, (2)
wheren is the number of utterances. Prompt-Red micro reflects
4781
Table 1: Post-correction results on bias-word utterances: (a) Earnings-21 (English; 417) and (b) CSJ (Japanese; 442). Red. denotes
Prompt-Red (prompt-length reduction) as mic/mac (micro/macro).
(a) English (b) Japanese
Method WER ↓ Bias-P↑ Bias-R↑ Bias-F1↑
Red.↑
(mic/mac) CER ↓ Bias-P↑ Bias-R↑ Bias-F1↑
Red.↑
(mic/mac)
ASR (no post-correction) 31.24 1.000 0.278 0.435 – 16.02 1.000 0.377 0.548 –
LLM post-correction
w/o KWS (baseline) 29.06 0.952 0.745 0.836 – 14.86 1.000 0.479 0.648 –
w/ KWS Top-1 30.40 0.990 0.475 0.642 93.2/89.7 15.62 1.000 0.428 0.599 84.6/79.6
w/ KWS Top-5 29.51 0.954 0.740 0.834 86.9/81.3 15.34 1.000 0.423 0.595 77.3/72.1
w/ KWS Top-10 29.15 0.946 0.790 0.861 81.0/75.2 14.62 1.000 0.507 0.673 71.7/66.7
w/ KWS Top-20 28.92 0.945 0.782 0.856 70.9/65.1 14.09 1.000 0.552 0.711 63.3/59.0
w/ KWS Top-30 28.82 0.937 0.821 0.875 66.3/61.8 13.98 1.000 0.572 0.728 64.1/59.6
the total prompt-length reduction, while Prompt-Red macro aver-
ages per-utterance reduction. Here, prompt length L is mea-
sured as the number of characters in the concatenated LLM in-
put (instructions + history + hypothesis).
5. Results
5.1. Main Results
Table 1 shows that Audio-KWS-gated Top-N retrieval offers
a controllable accuracy–prompt-length trade-off. This enables
scalable use of a growing error memory within the LLM con-
text window. With moderate filtering (around 70% prompt re-
duction), Top-20 for English (70.9% micro) and Top-10 for
Japanese (71.7% micro) substantially reduce prompt length
while matching or improving WER/CER and Bias-F1 over the
capped recent-history baseline (w/o KWS) in both languages.
At Top-30, we obtain the best overall WER/CER and Bias-F1,
at the cost of a smaller prompt reduction.
Earnings-21 (English). As shown in Table 1(a), Top-20 im-
proves over the baseline (WER 28.92 vs. 29.06; Bias-F1 0.856
vs. 0.836) while reducing prompt length by 70.9%/65.1% (mi-
cro/macro). Top-30 achieves the best overall accuracy (WER
28.82) and Bias-F1 (0.875), with a smaller prompt reduction
(66.3%/61.8%). More aggressive filtering (Top-1) yields larger
reduction but degrades both WER and Bias-F1. Table 2 gives
qualitative English examples. Figure 2 shows the per-utterance
prompt length for English, highlighting how Top-N retrieval
suppresses prompt growth compared to the baseline.
CSJ (Japanese). Table 1(b) shows a controllable accuracy–
prompt-reduction trade-off. Top-10 achieves about 70% prompt
reduction (71.7%/66.7%, micro/macro) while improving both
CER and Bias-F1 over the baseline (CER 14.62 vs. 14.86; Bias-
F1 0.673 vs. 0.648). Top-30 achieves the best CER (13.98) and
Bias-F1 (0.728), with a smaller yet still substantial prompt re-
duction (64.1%/59.6%). These results indicate that spotting on
phonetic readings while editing orthographic strings supports
robust retrieval from the error memory and conservative correc-
tions for Japanese.
5.2. Ablation: reference-side-only on keyword inventory
We ablate the keyword inventory construction by indexing only
reference-side phrases ( ref only) instead of indexing both
reference- and hypothesis-side variants ( ref hyp). Through-
out, ∆ denotes ref only−ref hyp. In English, ref only
Table 2: Example corrections (ref/hyp/corr).
ref: . . . main drivers,eTouch.
hyp: . . . main driverseach touch.
corr: . . . main driverseTouch.
ref: . . . ourEVP . . . acquisitions ofPall, IDT and Cytiva . . .
hyp: . . . ourebp . . . acquisitions ofpaul ivt and sativa . . .
corr: . . . ourEVP . . . acquisitions ofPall, IDT and Cytiva . . .
Figure 2: Total prompt length per utterance on Earnings-21
(English) for each retrieval policy.
helps at small N (Top-5: ∆WER−0.21pp and ∆Bias-F1
+0.083), but degrades for largerN (Top-20: ∆WER +0.09pp
and ∆Bias-F1−0.050). In Japanese, ref only consistently
reduces Bias-F1 across Top-N settings (e.g., Top-20: ∆CER
+0.41pp and ∆Bias-F1−0.034); we therefore use ref hyp
by default for Japanese.
6. Conclusion
We presented an Audio-KWS-gated retrieval framework for in-
cremental LLM-based ASR post-correction that curbs prompt
growth under the LLM context window limit (via anM-record
cap). With moderate filtering (Top-20 for English; Top-10 for
Japanese), we achieve about 70% prompt reduction while im-
proving WER/CER and Bias-F1 over the capped recent-history
baseline (w/o KWS); Top-30 yields the best overall accuracy
with a smaller reduction. Future work will address KWS misses
and improve end-to-end throughput by accelerating inference in
the analysis and correction steps.
4782
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
We used generative AI tools to assist with English proofreading
and minor wording edits. All technical content, experimental
design, results, and conclusions were produced and verified by
the authors.