Synthetic Audio Generation Framework for Air Traffic Control
Speech Recognition
Rapha¨el Bagat ID 1,∗∗, Zhe Zhang ID 2, Junichi Yamagishi ID 2, Irina Illina ID 1, Emmanuel Vincent ID 1
1 Universit´e de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, LORIA, F-54000 Nancy, France
2 National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
raphael.bagat@loria.fr
Abstract
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems, despite achiev-
ing remarkable accuracy in general-purpose domains with na-
tive speech (L1), struggle in domains like Air Traffic Control
(ATC) due to strong channel noise, a presence of non-native
(L2) English accents, and data scarcity. We propose a synthetic
data generation pipeline with acoustical properties simulations
specifically designed to address this lack of real data to improve
recognition accuracy in the ATC domain. Our approach lever-
ages a combination of neural generation techniques, including
Text-to-Speech, V oice Conversion, L2-to-L1 accent conversion,
and a novel controllable L1-to-L2 accent conversion framework
built to simulate accented speech. Our experiments with the
Whisper model on the ATCO2 corpus demonstrate that fine-
tuning with either synthetic data alone, or a mix of real and
synthetic data, significantly improves the word error rate over
out-of-the-box and real data only baselines respectively.
Index Terms: speech recognition, air traffic control domain,
synthetic data generation, accent conversion, data augmenta-
tion, non-native speech
1. Introduction
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems have achieved
remarkable accuracy in general-purpose domains [1]. However,
deploying these systems in safety-critical environments like Air
Traffic Control (ATC) remains a challenge. ATC communica-
tions are characterized by acoustic and linguistic complexities:
domain-specific phraseology, rapid speech rates, radio channel
distortions, a heavy presence of non-native (L2) English ac-
cents, and lack of real data. Thus, standard ASR models suffer
performance degradation when exposed to this domain [2].
Historically, efforts to adapt ASR systems to the ATC do-
main relied on supervised learning utilizing small-scale or re-
gionally limited datasets [3, 4]. To address this data scarcity,
the field has recently transitioned toward self-supervised learn-
ing on large unlabeled corpora. Self-supervised learning has
been used on ATC data to improve speech recognition [5, 6].
To mitigate data scarcity in this domain, data augmentation
can be used to enhance acoustic diversity by synthesizing new
samples from existing data. Traditional augmentation strate-
gies predominantly operate via linear transformations or signal
corruption. They use waveform-level modifications like speed
perturbation [7], pitch shifting, and additive background noise
injection [8]. At the feature level, SpecAugment [9] remains the
standard, applying time warping, frequency masking, and time
masking directly to spectrograms.
**indicates the corresponding author.
To advance this direction, we leverage generative modeling
to synthesize data with diverse accents, speakers, and acous-
tic conditions using text-to-speech, voice conversion, and ac-
cent conversion. When processing accented speech, generative
frameworks are increasingly used for accent conversion (AC),
which modifies an utterance’s accent while preserving its lin-
guistic content and speaker identity. AC is most commonly ap-
plied to accent normalization [10, 11], i.e., mapping L2 speech
to a standard L1 accent to improve intelligibility. Since L1
speech is generally easier to recognize than L2 speech, accent
normalization has been used in ASR as a pre-processing step,
yielding significant improvements over directly recognizing L2
speech [12, 13]. To train such accent normalization systems,
previous work has leveraged text-to-speech (TTS) systems to
generate parallel L1–L2 data. [14] utilizes TTS models in a
dual manner to generate large-scale parallel synthetic training
data across diverse accents. TokAN [15] further improves con-
trol over the synthesized normalized speech by incorporating a
flow-matching model to regulate speech duration. However, the
challenging task of L1-to-L2 accent conversion remains largely
unexplored.
A complementary direction to AC is voice conversion (VC),
which modifies speaker identity rather than accent. VC has been
used for data augmentation to improve ASR robustness on large
corpora such as LibriSpeech [16], to mitigate gender imbalance
[17], and to support low-resource languages [18].
Prior ASR research on ATC data has improved performance
through in-domain fine-tuning [4], transfer learning [19], and
regional datasets [20]. Advanced methods include cascaded
frameworks [21], external language model integration [22], and
unsupervised pre-training [23], while contextual biasing has
been applied to multilingual ATC ASR [24]. However, there
remains a need for generative data augmentation techniques tai-
lored to ATC to mitigate data scarcity.
In this paper, to address the scarcity of real data in the ATC
domain, we propose a novel synthetic audio generation frame-
work for ATC speech recognition. Our framework includes the
use of TTS, VC, AC, and ATC acoustical simulation. These
generative strategies represent a novel direction for the ATC
domain, as VC and AC have not previously been explored in
this context. Rather than relying on new data collection, we
generate additional ATC training data from existing recordings
and transcriptions. Moreover, instead of limiting our approach
to traditional L2-to-L1 accent conversion, we introduce a con-
trollable L1-to-L2 accent conversion model to increase accent
diversity in ATC speech. Experiments show that fine-tuning an
ASR model on synthetic data alone reduces the word error rate
(WER) on real ATC speech. Furthermore, fine-tuning with a
combination of real and synthetic data yields significantly larger
WER improvements than fine-tuning on real data alone.
2093
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2422
2. Proposed Methodology
To address data scarcity in the ATC domain, we aim to syn-
thesize diverse aspects of ATC speech. Figure 1 illustrates an
overview of our framework, which generates diverse variants
of transcribed ATC utterances by leveraging pre-trained mod-
ules for speech/noise separation, super-resolution, TTS, VC,
and AC. In addition, we propose a novel L1-to-L2 accent con-
version model. The framework further includes an ATC acous-
tic simulation module to reproduce realistic ATC channel con-
ditions. Our source code is publicly available1.
2.1. Speech / noise separation and super-resolution
Real ATC audio is heavily degraded by background noise and
radio-channel distortions. To effectively leverage pre-trained
neural generation modules, we first enhance the audio to bet-
ter match the acoustic distribution of standard pre-training cor-
pora. Specifically, we employ the speech–environment separa-
tion module from DAIEN-TTS [25], which produces separated
clean speech and background noise.
Moreover, an important characteristic of ATC radio com-
munications is their sampling rate: real ATC recordings are typ-
ically sampled at 8kHz. Since the pre-trained generation mod-
ules we use (Section 2.2) are trained on higher sampling rates
(16 kHz or above), we apply super-resolution to the separated
clean speech using AudioSR [26] to enhance speech quality.
2.2. Synthetic data generation
To generate diverse variations of the real data, we explore multi-
ple generative approaches: TTS, voice conversion, L2-to-L1 ac-
cent conversion, and a novel L1-to-L2 accent conversion model.
Using transcriptions from real ATC data, we synthesize acous-
tically diverse speech while preserving ATC phraseology.
Text-to-speech (TTS) —This method generates L1 speech
from L2 ATC speech. We want to investigate if the presence of
ATC L1 speech in the ASR training data can be helpful. Follow-
ing previous works [14, 15], we use a TTS system with voice
cloning system to generate L1 data from L2 data. For this, we
chose the F5-TTS model [27] which is a flow-matching diffu-
sion Transformer. It generates high quality audio, from the de-
sired text, and an audio sample to extract the speaker identity
from. Since this model has been trained on native English data,
it generates L1-like speech.
Voice conversion (VC) —V oice conversion allows increasing
the diversity of speakers in the dataset. We chose k-nearest
neighbors voice conversion (kNN-VC) [28] as the model due
to its high quality results. It converts the voice of the input
speech into a random reference’s voice. This increases speaker
diversity without changing the number of accents.
L2-to-L1 accent conversion (ACL2→L1) —In contrast to TTS,
the method we adopt, TokAN [15], does not require text to con-
vert L2 speech into L1 speech. TokAN was proposed for accent
normalization and leverages HuBERT discrete units [29] as an
intermediate representation. It performs accent normalization
using the following steps:
1. extracting discrete HuBERT tokens from input L2 speech;
2. converting the L2 discrete HuBERT tokens into L1 tokens
using a token-based accent conversion module, conditioned
by the accent embedding computed from the input speech;
1https://gitlab.inria.fr/rbagat/atc_
generation
Figure 1:Synthetic audio generation framework for ATC.
3. synthesizing the Mel-spectrogram from the L1 tokens using
a token-to-Mel synthesizer model, conditioned on a speaker
embedding extracted from the input speech and the input ut-
terance duration;
4. synthesizing the L1 speech waveform from the generated
Mel-spectrogram using a vocoder.
L1-to-L2 accent conversion (ACL1→L2) —Our fourth gener-
ative approach is L1-to-L2 accent conversion, i.e., generating
non-native accented speech from native speech. By increas-
ing accent diversity, we investigate whether exposure to a wider
range of L2 accents improves ATC ASR. To this end, we repur-
pose the TokAN architecture for controllable L1-to-L2 conver-
sion. Figure 2 illustrates the modified architecture, which we
detail below.
Repurposing— To repurpose TokAN for the L1-to-L2 task,
we start from the publicly available pre-trained TokAN model
[15] to leverage its learned representations and adapt it to ATC.
TokAN’s token conversion module and token-to-mel synthe-
sizer are the core components for accent conversion, and typ-
ically require substantially less data to fine-tune than the Hu-
BERT encoder or the vocoder. We therefore fine-tune these two
modules for L1-to-L2 conversion. In the original TokAN, the
token conversion module maps L2 tokens to L1 tokens. In our
setting, we fine-tune it to map L1 tokens to L2 tokens instead.
We follow the original TokAN training procedure, but use dis-
crete HuBERT tokens extracted from TTS-generated L1 speech
as input, and tokens extracted from L2 speech as the target.
Finally, to enable controllable L1-to-L2 conversion, we condi-
tion the conversion module on the target L2 accent embedding.
Specifically, during the repurposing stage we use the accent em-
bedding extracted from the target L2 speech. Similarly, to fine-
tune the synthesizer, we use HuBERT tokens extracted from L2
speech as input and the corresponding Mel-spectrogram as the
target. This enables the synthesizer to better handle L2 tokens
and to generate ATC spectrograms with a “radio-like” filter.
Inference— At inference time, the repurposed TokAN sys-
tem takes two inputs: L1 speech2 and a target L2 utterance that
2Generated using TTS, since we do not have L1 ATC speech
2094
Figure 2:Repurposed TokAN architecture for controllable L1-
to-L2 accent conversion.
provides the accent reference. While the speaker embedding
can be extracted from the L1 input by default, it can also be ex-
tracted from a separate reference audio, enabling simultaneous
control of both accent and speaker identity.
2.3. ATC acoustic simulation
To faithfully simulate ATC speech, we apply a sequence of
ATC-specific acoustic simulation (AAS) steps to the gener-
ated synthetic audio: resampling, band-pass filtering, and back-
ground noise injection. Since our ATC speech corpus (Section
3.1) contains bandwidth-limited audio (up to 8 kHz), we first
downsample the generated audio to 8 kHz and then upsample
it back to 16 kHz to match the sampling rate expected by our
models. We then apply an additional high-pass filter with a
200 Hz cutoff, consistent with typical ATC communications.
Finally, we mix synthetic utterance with the separated back-
ground noise from the corresponding real utterance. Since each
synthetic sample is generated from a specific real recording, we
can exploit this parallel structure to inject the same noise track
extracted from the original audio during speech separation.
3. Experimental Setup
3.1. Datasets
Real ATC data —Our experiments focus on the ATCO2 3
dataset [30]. It consists of ATC communications recorded at
seven airports. The dataset exhibits key characteristics of ATC
speech, including non-native accents, strong channel noise,
high speech rates, and domain-specific phraseology. In our
experiments, we use only the 4 hours of human-transcribed
speech. ATCO2 does not provide metadata on the number of
speakers or their native languages. Due to the limited data size,
we conduct 4-fold cross-validation. For each fold, we use 1 h
12 min for accent conversion fine-tuning, another 1 h 12 min
for ASR fine-tuning, 36 min for validation and 1 h for testing.
Synthetic ATC data —For each type of synthetic data gen-
eration method in our pipeline, we generate the same duration
as the real data (4 hours). This allows us to study each factor
(accent diversity, speaker diversity, plus ATC acoustic simula-
tion) separately. When processing utterances with kNN-VC, we
convert each source voice to a target speaker randomly sampled
from the L2-ARCTIC corpus [31]. L2-ARCTIC contains clean
read L2 speech from 24 speakers, enabling additional speaker
diversity. For F5-TTS, we use the transcript of the correspond-
ing ATC utterance as text input for voice cloning.
Due to the difficulty of the L1-to-L2 conversion task, the
AC system may produce hallucinated outputs. To automatically
detect and remove such samples, we transcribe generated audio
3ATCO2 project data, ELRA catalog (http://catalog.elra.
info), ISLRN : 589-403-577-685-7, ELRA ID : ELRA-S0484
with Whisper-large-v3-turbo [32] and discard samples whose
WER exceeds 50% relative to the input transcript. This causes
the removal of approximately 35% of the generated audio.
3.2. General parameters
Accent conversion fine-tuning —We fine-tune TokAN for
both L2-to-L1 and L1-to-L2 accent conversion. For L2-to-L1,
we fine-tune TokAN using only ATCO2 data. For L1-to-L2,
since this is a new conversion direction, we first fine-tune on the
larger L2-ARCTIC dataset [31], following the same fine-tuning
split described in [15], and then further fine-tune on ATCO2.
To fine-tune TokAN for L1-to-L2 conversion, we update
both the token conversion module and the token-to-mel syn-
thesizer. The token conversion module is fine-tuned using the
same hyperparameters as [15], except that we reduce the con-
nectionist temporal classification (CTC) loss weight to 0.2 to
allow more phonetic variability. The synthesizer is fine-tuned
only on ATCO2, using the original hyperparameters. More-
over, since our L1-to-L2 architecture supports both accent and
speaker conditioning, we obtain the target accent and speaker
embeddings by randomly sampling a reference utterance from
either ATCO2 or L2-ARCTIC for each synthesized utterance.
The entire TokAN fine-tuning and generation pipeline takes 15
hours on a single NVIDIA A100.
Speech recognition —To assess whether our generative
pipeline mitigates ATC data scarcity for ASR, we evaluate syn-
thetic data through downstream recognition experiments. We
use Whisper-small [32], which offers a favorable trade-off be-
tween accuracy and computational cost. It has been pre-trained
on a wide variety of languages, which is beneficial to handle
accented speech [33]. We fine-tune Whisper on (i) real ATC
data only, (ii) synthetic data only, or (iii) a mixture of real and
synthetic data, with or without enabling AAS. Fine-tuning is
performed for 20 epochs with a learning rate of1×10 −5 and
a batch size of 16. When fine-tuning using a mix of real and
synthetic data, we ensure a 50/50 ratio of real/synthetic data
within each mini-batch. On a single NVIDIA A100 GPU, fine-
tuning takes approximately 3 hours with a single data type and
6 hours when mixing real and synthetic data. Experimental re-
sults are reported using WER on the test set of the real ATCO2
corpus. We employ early stopping based on validation set per-
formance to prevent overfitting. The statistical significance of
performance differences is assessed using the matched pair seg-
ment test provided by SCTK [34].
4. Results and Discussions
Baselines —We consider two baselines (last two rows of Ta-
ble 1): the out-of-the-box Whisper-small model (63.32% WER)
and the same model fine-tuned exclusively on real ATCO2
data (22.69% WER). In-domain fine-tuning substantially im-
proves performance, highlighting the importance of adapting
ASR models to ATC-specific data.
Fine-tuning with synthetic data exclusively —To assess the
relevance and acoustic fidelity of the generated data, we fine-
tune the ASR model using only synthetic speech. As shown
in Table 1, all synthetic pipelines significantly outperform the
out-of-the-box Whisper baseline (63.32% WER), demonstrat-
ing that the generated data is informative for ATC ASR and
supports the feasibility of generative augmentation. Within the
synthetic-only setting, VC yields the two best results (24.18%
with AAS and 26.46% without), suggesting that VC data
closely models real ATC data, thus providing an informative
2095
Table 1:WER (%) obtained by fine-tuning Whisper-small under different training sets and synthetic data generation strategies.Baseline
rows report the out-of-the-box Whisper-small performance (no fine-tuning) and fine-tuned with real ATCO2 data only, shown for
reference.Target Accentindicates the dataset used to compute the target accent embedding (only applicable to L1-to-L2 AC methods).
VC (L1→L2)indicates whether voice conversion is additionally applied for L1-to-L2 accent conversion. The two WER columns report
performance when fine-tuning onSynth-onlydata versusReal+Synthdata. Bold numbers indicate, for each column, the best result
and the results which are statistically equivalent to it.
WER (%)
Synth-only Real+Synth
TTS × - - 53.88 22.90
TTS ✓ - - 33.77 21.69
VC × - - 26.46 22.45
VC ✓ - - 24.18 22.54
ACL2→L1 ✓ - - 41.60 25.92
ACL1→L2 × L2-ARCTIC Yes 38.22 21.64
ACL1→L2 ✓ ATCO2 No / Yes 33.84 / 31.40 22.60 /22.00
ACL1→L2 ✓ L2-ARCTIC No / Yes 32.96 / 31.48 22.16/21.95
VC + TTS ✓ - - 34.39 22.00
ACL1→L2 + TTS ✓ L2-ARCTIC Yes 28.90 21.69
ACL1→L2 + VC ✓ L2-ARCTIC Yes 32.20 22.07
ACL1→L2 + VC + TTS ✓ L2-ARCTIC Yes 28.05 22.91
Out-of-the-box - - - 63.32
Fine-tuning with real data only - - - 22.69
Category Method AAS Target Accent VC (L1→L2)
Speech Synthesis
Voice Conversion
Accent Conversion
Synthetic Mix
Baseline
training signal. Beyond linguistic factors, matching the physical
acoustic environment with AAS consistently benefits ASR. As
shown in Table 1, applying AAS significantly improves down-
stream performance across synthesis methods. Notably, TTS
data with AAS (33.77% WER) achieves a 37% relative reduc-
tion compared to TTS without AAS (53.88%), highlighting the
importance of simulating ATC channel characteristics for ATC
ASR. Accent conversion also yields promising results, particu-
larly our proposed L1-to-L2 model. Converting accent alone is
effective (33.84% and 32.96% WER), and performance further
improves when jointly converting both accent and speaker iden-
tity (31.40% and 31.48% WER). However, L2-to-L1 AC with
AAS leads to moderate improvements, hinting that fine-tuning
using L1 data is not sufficient for the ATC domain.
Fine-tuning with real and synthetic data —When a small
amount of real data is available, it is natural to fine-tune the
ASR model on a mixture of real and synthetic data, effectively
doubling the fine-tuning set while keeping the amount of real
data fixed (1 h 12 min). Results are reported in the last column
of Table 1. Among the tested strategies, our proposed L1-to-
L2 AC achieves thebest WER (21.64%), significantly outper-
forming the real-only baseline (22.69%). Several other real and
synthetic data mixes yield statistically equivalent results (shown
in bold). In contrast, mixing real data with L2-to-L1 accent-
converted speech degrades performance (25.92%), suggesting
that adding a single “normalized” accent is less beneficial than
increasing accent diversity. Mixing real data with L1-to-L2
accent-converted speech yields consistent gains, which further
improve when speaker identity is also converted (22.60% vs.
22.16%). Finally, VC does not improve performance, indicat-
ing that accent diversity is more critical than speaker diversity,
given the heavy accent variability in ATC.
Combining synthetic data —In theSynthetic Mixcategory of
Table 1, we report results obtained by mixing different types of
synthetic data. In each configuration, we use the full set of gen-
erated samples for every selected augmentation method. When
fine-tuning Whisper on synthetic data only, combining accent
conversion, voice conversion, TTS, and AAS yields the best
performance, achieving 28.05% WER. This substantially im-
proves over using each generation method separately, with the
exception of VC, which remains the strongest single augmenta-
tion method. When mixing synthetic and real data, most syn-
thetic mixes achieve performance that is statistically equivalent
to the best result reported above (21.64%). The only excep-
tion is the configuration that combinesallsynthetic data types,
which does not provide additional gains.
5. Conclusion
We investigated generative data augmentation strategies to ad-
dress data scarcity in Air Traffic Control (ATC) automatic
speech recognition. We proposed a novel synthetic data genera-
tion framework for ATC speech recognition that includes TTS,
VC, AC, and domain-specific acoustical simulation. Further-
more, this work introduced a novel controllable L1-to-L2 AC
module to increase the accent diversity of ATC speech. Ex-
periments on ATCO2 using Whisper showed that fine-tuning
on synthetic data alone significantly improves the recognition
performance compared to the out-of-the-box model. More-
over, fine-tuning on a mixture of real data and synthetic L1-to-
L2 accent-converted speech or TTS with acoustical simulation
yields a significant improvement compared to fine-tuning on
real data alone. Though, generative data augmentation for ATC
speech recognition warrants further investigation. Future work
will explore the synthesis of L2 speech with fine-grained flu-
ency control, the generative modelling of domain-specific noise,
the expansion of textual corpora via large language models, and
the use of larger ASR models. Finally, perceptual evaluation
and per-accent analysis would provide insights into the quality
of the generated data.
2096
6. Use of Generative AI Disclosure
Generative AI tools were solely used for polishing the
manuscript. The authors take the full responsibility for the con-
tent of this manuscript.
7. Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the DeepMAUVES project sup-
ported by DGA of french MoD and CNRS, by the Inria-NII
TrustedSpeech Associate Team, and MEXT KAKENHI Grants
(24K21324). It was granted access to the HPC resources
of IDRIS under the allocation 2024-AD011015024 made by
GENCI. Authors would like to thank Ye-Xin Lu for giving us
access to the DAIEN-TTS SES model.