HALAS: A Human-Annotated Dataset of Hallucinations of Modern ASR
Systems
Mateusz Bara´nski ID , Jan Jasi´nski ID ∗∗, Julitta Bartolewska ID , Marcin Witkowski ID ,
Konrad Kowalczyk ID
Signal Processing Group, Institute of Electronics, AGH University of Krakow, Poland
mbaranski@agh.edu.pl, jjasinsk@agh.edu.pl, bartolew@agh.edu.pl, witkow@agh.edu.pl,
konrad.kowalczyk@agh.edu.pl
Abstract
End-to-end Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems
hallucinate on natural speech, yet existing mitigation methods
are typically evaluated on non-speech or artificially corrupted
audio. We introduce HALAS, the first human-annotated dataset
of naturally occurring hallucinations from seven state-of-the-art
ASR models on real unprocessed earnings call recordings. HA-
LAS provides span-level labels, enabling analysis of halluci-
nation patterns and their severity. Our analysis reveals strong
cross-model vocabulary overlap and confirms that hallucina-
tions also occur for almost correctly transcribed speech (char-
acterized by a low Word Error Rate). The proposed benchmark
with HALAS shows that the character and semantic-level met-
rics used as a proxy for hallucination detection reach 81% ROC-
AUC, while state-of-the-art detection methods achieve an F1
score of only 53.1%. As such, HALAS establishes the first rig-
orous non-artificial benchmark for the detection and mitigation
of ASR hallucinations.
Index Terms: automatic speech recognition, speech-to-text
hallucinations, error detection, human-annotated dataset, ASR
error analysis
1. Introduction
Although an impressive generalization of modern ASR mod-
els to various datasets and domains is achieved in zero-shot
settings, the use of unreliable training data [1], and the over-
reliance on training patterns [2] occasionally results inhallu-
cinations. Most researchers agree on the definition that ASR
hallucinations are erroneous texts in the generated transcription
that do not correspond to the words spoken in the audio input
[1, 3, 4, 5, 6]. In this research, we follow a similar definition
of hallucination: specific errors in ASR predictions, which vary
from minor filler words to additions that change or contradict
intent, or loopings, i.e. multiple repetitions of a word or phrase.
The appearance of hallucinations in the ASR output can indi-
cate a malfunctioning system and lower the user experience, or
even lead to misinformation or misinterpretation, especially in
a medical context [5, 7].
The very recent methods for the detection of hallucinations
might be divided into reference-based methods, which require
ground truth text, and non-reference approaches. The first group
utilizes reference text to validate whether the ASR output pre-
diction contains hallucinations, e.g., by comparing the output
prediction to the reference text using LLMs [6]. Non-reference
approaches involve detection based on a lookup-list of the most
frequent phrases generated based on non-speech audio input [4]
or binary classification of an embedding from a specific decoder
**indicates the corresponding author.
layer [8]. Detection based on thresholding of reference-based
or non-reference-based proxy metrics such as Word Error Rate
(WER) and Perplexity [1] might be considered as a mixed ap-
proach. Mitigation of hallucinations from ASR has been ex-
plored through pre-processing of audio input using V oice Ac-
tivity Detection (V AD) [9], fine-tuning of either the weights
of the ASR model [10] or its self-attention heads [11] using
noisy recordings devoid of speech, for which the model should
return empty transcriptions. The assessment of all the above-
mentioned methods has been performed using audio datasets of
non-speech or artificially corrupted speech, limiting their appli-
cability in practice. To our knowledge, the occurrence of ASR
hallucinations for unprocessed real speech has not been investi-
gated so far.
In this paper, we aim to fill this gap and introduce HALAS
-HallucinationAnnotations forLarge-scaleASRSystems - the
first publicly available dataset of human-labeled hallucinations
from seven state-of-the-art ASR models on recordings from the
Earnings 22 dataset [12]. First, we show the detailed descrip-
tion of dataset creation, including human annotation. Next, in
the qualitative and quantitative analysis, we scrutinize the anno-
tated ASR outputs, and show that all models indeed hallucinate
on real data with the phrases of overlapping distributions. The
investigation conducted with LLM indicates that a substantial
amount of hallucination is severe regardless of the model. Fi-
nally, with an established HALAS benchmark that encompasses
carefully prepared train and test splits, we evaluate hallucination
detection based on multiple proxy metrics and SOTA methods,
showing the challenging character of the problem studied using
data with natural speech. We also show that a multi-layer exten-
sion of a decoder-embedding detector, trained on HALAS, im-
proves upon the baseline for both in-domain and out-of-domain
data. All in all, the contributions of the paper are (i) novel HA-
LAS dataset, (ii) the first analysis of hallucinations of SOTA
ASR models on real data, and (iii) the proposed benchmark that
allows for evaluation of detection methods against naturally oc-
curring, human-annotated hallucinations.
2. Dataset Creation Methodology
The following section presents the entire dataset creation pro-
cess, depicted in Fig. 1. We assumed that real-world sponta-
neous speech recordings of varying lengths and qualities would
pose challenges to ASR models, thus increasing the chances
of hallucinations. We used the Earnings 22 (E22) dataset [12]
as it contains earnings calls in English conducted by speakers
from 27 countries. The provided audio files 1 with total length
1https://huggingface.co/datasets/
distil-whisper/earnings22
6698
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-337
Figure 1:Diagram of audio file pipeline in HALAS creation.
119 h are divided into 57390 segments with the 5th and 95th
percentiles of duration equal to 0.6 s and 17.6 s, respectively.
We selected 7 state-of-the-art ASR models that achieve low
WER results across various datasets in the Open ASR Leader-
board [13] (as of June 1, 2025). The selected models in-
clude 4 versions of OpenAI’s Whisper [14]: large v3 (Wv3),
large v3 Turbo (Wv3T), large v2 (Wv2), and Crisper Whisper
(CrW) [10] (a modified fine-tuned version of Wv2), as well
as 2 autoregressive encoder-decoder (AED) models: Nvidia
Nemo Canary-1B (Can) [15] and its parameter-reduced version
Canary-1B-Flash (CanF) [16]; along with another model from
Nvidia Nemo, Parakeet-TDT version 2 (Par) [17]. We used
Hugging Face implementations for CrW, Wv2 and GitHub ver-
sions for the remaining models. To our knowledge, all of these
models did not utilize the E22 dataset during training. Infer-
ences were conducted using all 7 models with the default pa-
rameters proposed by their creators on the entire E22 dataset.
2.1. Speech data and state-of-the-art ASR models
To maximize hallucination prevalence in our annotation pool,
we used inter-model disagreement, namely inter-model WER,
as a proxy for audio difficulty. The intuition is that when the
same audio yields substantially different transcriptions across
models, it is likely to be genuinely challenging and prone to se-
vere recognition errors, including hallucinations. The following
candidate selection procedure was utilized:
•Preprocessing:All files marked in E22 with the tags ”in-
audible” and ”foreign language” were discarded.
•Candidate Selection:First, to prevent repetitive looping
from dominating the disagreement metric, we removed repe-
titions of the same words or phrases and then, for fair com-
parison, we also normalized all predictions2. Next, we calcu-
lated the average inter-model WER across all possible pairs
of ASR models (using one model’s prediction as the refer-
ence for another) for each audio file. The candidates for
the annotation process were selected from the top of the list
of segments with descending average inter-model WER val-
ues. Note that looping removal and normalization were ap-
plied solely for metric calculation, thus in the next annotation
steps, original predictions of selected audio files were used.
2.2. Hallucination Annotation process
HALAS was annotated by 10 paid professional annotators (En-
glish B2+). In line with hallucination definitions in the literature
[1, 3, 6], the instruction for annotators defined hallucinations as
”A prediction, or a fragment thereof, that has no phonetic corre-
spondence with the content of the audio signal analyzed by the
ASR model”. The distinction between hallucinations and pho-
netic errors was explained with specific examples. Marking was
to be conducted solely on the basis of the comparison of each
prediction with the audio recording, specifically not the refer-
ence text provided by the dataset. For each audio sample, an
2BasicTextNormalizer fromhttps://pypi.org/project/
whisper-normalizerwas used.
Table 1:Number of files, 5th and 95th file duration percentiles,
and hallucination rates (HR) in the splits of HALAS dataset.
Split #P 5 [s]P 95 [s] HR [%]
train 2866 0.26 8.02 33.6
test 745 1.22 12.15 22.6
annotator was asked to perform the following steps:
•Audio Validation:The audio was played and carefully ana-
lyzed, allowing the annotator to identify and mark any issues,
such as the absence of speech, simultaneous speech from
multiple speakers, or predominantly non-English speech.
Such files were excluded to avoid annotation ambiguity.
•Prediction Hallucination Annotation:For each ASR
model, the annotators were asked to read the prediction, lis-
ten to the audio recording once more, and mark the words
or phrases that follow the hallucination definition and tag
them as ”Hallucination,” ”Looping,” or ”Looping Hallucina-
tion”. The distinction between the last two tags is based on
whether the word or phrase, which is repeated erroneously,
was present in the speech or was itself a hallucination.
As depicted in Fig. 1, each file was processed by 2 inde-
pendent annotators, with a third annotator acting as a decisive
arbitrator. The initial annotation agreement was high (Cohen’s
kappa = 0.87) [18]. Although Earnings-22 provides reference
transcripts, annotators frequently flagged them as incorrect. To
ensure reliable ground truth, the arbitrator re-checked and cor-
rected all references, marking 14% of examples as inaudible
where the spoken content could not be clearly discerned.
Note that HALAS is intentionally constructed to contain
a high proportion of hallucinations by sampling utterances ex-
hibiting inter-model disagreement. As a result, the dataset does
not reflect the frequency of real-world hallucinations in typical
ASR deployment scenarios. Nevertheless, the annotated hal-
lucinations originate from real speech recordings and therefore
capture naturally occurring error patterns of ASRs.
3. Hallucination Dataset
The HALAS dataset contains predictions with hallucination an-
notations for 3,611 audio files from the Earnings 22 dataset
and 7 state-of-the-art ASR models listed in Section 2. The
dataset is provided as a CSV file, where each row corresponds
to a single audio sample identified by its E22 filename (in for-
matSEGMENT-ID FILE-ID.wav). Each row encompasses the
predictions and corresponding human annotations for all seven
ASR models. Each model has an utterance-level hallucination
label and annotations detailing the text and letter span of the
hallucination or looping.Trainandtestsplits are provided in
which files were partitioned by source meeting and stratified
by average WER, hallucination rate and duration. To ensure
a stable evaluation benchmark, thetestset was filtered to in-
clude only audio exceeding 1.0 second with at least three words.
This yielded a reliabletestsplit with a hallucination rate of
22.6%, compared to 33.6% in thetrainsplit. The summary
of the splits of the HALAS dataset are presented in Table 1.
The dataset together with all supplementary material, includ-
ing commit hashes and inference parameters for all models, is
available on the GitHub repository3 and HuggingFace4.
3https://github.com/DSP-AGH/HALAS/tree/main
4https://huggingface.co/datasets/MatBar99/
HALAS
6699
Table 2:Summary of annotation results for each model, including annotated error count, hallucination and looping rates, WER, and
the percentage of utterances contained within the top 10 and top 30 most commonly occurring phrases.
Model Wv2 Wv3 Wv3T CrW Can CanF Par Average
Annotated Errors [#] 1518 858 1060 772 1213 1099 1217 1105
Hallucination Rate [%] 43.8 23.8 29.4 21.4 33.6 30.4 33.7 30.9
Looping Rate [%] 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 0.9 3.1 0.2 1.1
WER [%] 74.16 31.46 37.33 41.10 48.48 110.5 42.91 55.13
Top 10 / 30 [%] 53 / 68 59 / 79 66 / 84 48 / 75 44 / 67 34 / 58 83 / 93 55 / 75
0 50 100 150 200 250+
WER [%]
0
50Pct (%)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
0
5
Zoom: 0 - 80%
0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
BERTScore
0
10Pct (%)
No Hallucination Hallucination
Figure 2:All model WER (top) and BERTScore (bottom) distri-
bution. Extreme WER aggregated in 250+ overflow bin.
3.1. Quantitative and qualitative analysis of the dataset
Table 2 presents the number of audio samples with annotated er-
rors (marked as hallucination or looping) for each ASR model,
along with utterance level hallucination and looping rates. Hal-
lucination rate varies between 21.4% and 43.8%, confirming
that all investigated models hallucinate on HALAS audio data.
Looping occurs only in 1.1% cases on average. The values rang-
ing from 31.46% to 110.5% show the difficulty of HALAS au-
dio.
Next, we assess the hallucination distributions in the dataset
similarly to [4]. To this end, for each model, all marked hallu-
cinations were normalized, added to a single list, and the num-
ber of appearances of each of them was calculated, giving us a
distribution of hallucination texts. Analyzing these results, we
see that for each model, the distribution is heavily skewed to-
ward a small set of the most frequent phrases. On average, 55%
of marked hallucinations correspond to the top 10 phrases of
a given model. Expanding to the top 30 phrases increases this
coverage to 75%. This pattern is consistent with findings from
studies that examined Whisper’s hallucinations in non-speech
audio [4]. Our results indicate that this phenomenon is observed
across all tested models, with it being less pronounced for Can
and CanF, while Par results are even more heavily skewed.
Figure 2 shows the distributions of (per utterance) WER and
BERTScore [19]. These metrics are chosen to analyze struc-
tural and semantic differences. The WER histogram demon-
strates a large overlap between clean and hallucinated utter-
ances. This indicates that this metric cannot reliably isolate
hallucinations unless the erroneous insertions are catastrophi-
cally long, as seen in the 200% and the 250%+ overflow bins.
Peaks at multiples of 100% are an artifact of the many short
audio segments, with few words in their references. Interest-
ingly, hallucinations also occur for low values of WER reaching
6.25%. While the BERTScore distribution shows a visible left-
ward shift for hallucinations, there remains substantial overlap
with non-hallucinated text in the 0.80 to 0.95 range.
Thirteen phrases appeared in the lists of all models (you,
okay, thank you, good, the, thank, but, that, yeah, and, ahead,
question, you know) and five appeared in all but one (yes, it,
mr, much, so). When taking only the top 10 hallucinations from
Figure 3:Model hallucination distribution comparison.
Figure 4:Hallucination severity categories per ASR model.
each model, the most common phrases were:you, thank you,
okay, good, and, thank, thanks, yeah, yes, ahead, it.
Figure 3 shows a comparison of the distributions of hal-
lucinated phrases using Jensen-Shannon similarity [20]. Hal-
lucinations that appear only once are filtered out because they
are often longer permutations of common hallucinated phrases.
OpenAI Whispers (Wv3, Wv2, Wv3T) form a group with high
similarity scores (>0.84) of hallucination text distributions. Par
is a clear outlier with moderate similarity to most other models,
including Can and CanF which are also Nemo models. Overall,
this analysis demonstrates strong similarities between halluci-
nations generated by different ASR models.
3.2. Severity of hallucinations estimated using a LLM
Inspired by [6], we used GPT-4o mini5 to assess the severity of
hallucinations by classifying each hallucination as minor (low-
impact), moderate (partial obstruction/context shift) or severe
(contradictory/meaning-altering). Each case was evaluated five
times and the label was selected by majority vote. The agree-
ment was high (Fleiss’s kappa>0.79) [21]. The severity pro-
portions for each model are depicted in Fig. 4, and the complete
prompt is provided in the GitHub repository.
The severity of hallucination varies substantially across ar-
chitectures. Par, CrW, and Wv3 mainly produce minor in-
sertions, although more than 25% of their hallucinations still
5https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/
models/gpt-4o-mini
6700
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
False Positive Rate
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00True Positive Rate
CER (AUC: 0.81)
Sema (AUC: 0.80)
BERT (AUC: 0.77)
Insert. (AUC: 0.73)
WER (AUC: 0.72)
Length (AUC: 0.62)
PPL (AUC: 0.60)
Figure 5:ROC curves and AUC scores for various hallucination
metrics across all ASR models.
severely distort meaning. In contrast, CanF, Can and Wv2 ex-
hibit higher rates of severe errors (>38%). Across all models,
moderate hallucinations are least frequent, indicating that hal-
lucination errors are either benign fillers or major semantic dis-
ruptions that contradict or alter meaning.
4. Benchmarking Hallucination Detection
4.1. Detection with proxy metrics
Inspired by [1], we demonstrate how to use HALAS to bench-
mark 7 text proxy metrics against human ground-truth hallu-
cination labels for all 7 ASR models. The considered met-
rics might be categorized into three groups: standard ASR
structural metrics (WER, Character Error Rate (CER), Insertion
Rate [22] and Length Ratio [23]), semantic similarity metrics
(BERTScore [19] and SeMaScore [24]) and language model
features (GPT-2 Perplexity (PPL) [25]). Using metric values as
direct predictors of hallucinations, we calculated the Receiver
Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves and the Area Under the
Curve (AUC) [26] for all ASR predictions in HALAS. Figure
5 shows the results across all ASR models. The shapes of
the ROC curves and the AUC in the range of 0.7-0.8 indicate
that most of the structural and semantic metrics perform simi-
larly, with CER and SeMaScore slightly outperforming the oth-
ers, suggesting that combining those categories might result in
improved performance. The lower efficacy of Perplexity and
Length Ratio (AUC≤0.62) confirms that hallucinations anno-
tated in HALAS are often fluent and concise, indistinguishable
from correct predictions via simple heuristics.
Additionally, to assess the utility of the HALAS dataset, we
test whether hallucination detection by combining these metrics
generalizes across ASR models. For each model, we train an
XGBoost classifier [27] on the 7 text proxy metrics on the HA-
LAS training split using three regimes: only the target model’s
own training data (OWN), the training data of all other models
with the target unseen (OTHER), and all training data (ALL).
Averaged across the seven models, the classifier reaches a mean
ROC-AUC of 0.829 (OWN), 0.828 (OTHER), and 0.835 (ALL).
OTHER matching OWN indicates that HALAS can be used to
train hallucination detectors for any ASR model, including ones
absent from the dataset. Furthermore, AUC for ALL greater
than for OWN shows that multi-model annotations of HALAS
provide predictive value beyond any single architecture.
4.2. Detection with SOTA methods
In this section, we present the utility of HALAS by bench-
marking two SOTA detection approaches for Whisper large v3:
incorporating an LLM for comparing prediction to reference
text [6] and based on the classification of decoder embeddings
Table 3:Results [%] of all evaluated detectors on Wv3 HALAS.
Detector Acc. Prec. Rec. F1
GPT-4o mini 71.7 30.1 62.6 40.7
Gemini 2.0 Flash 84.5 50.0 35.7 41.6
DE 21 87.1 57.849.1 53.1
OTHER 83.3 47.6 60.9 53.4
ALL 83.7 48.764.355.4
DE 2,13,23 86.4 53.9 58.556.1
Table 4:Results [%] of DE detectors on out-of-domain data [4].
Detector Acc. Prec. Rec. F1
DE 21 72.5 67.677.972.4
DE 2,13,23 80.0 81.673.377.3
(DE) [8]. Results for GPT-4o mini and Gemini 2.0 Flash6 LLM
models are also included. We replicate [8] exactly, passing the
embedding from layer 21 of the Wv3 model decoder after gen-
erating End-of-Sequence token, into an utterance-level Logistic
Regression (LR) classifier [28] (DE 21). We extended this ap-
proach to combinations of up to three layers, with the best re-
sults obtained for the concatenated outputs of layers 2, 13, and
23 (DE 2,13,23). LR weights and biases were fitted using the
HALAStrainsplit. A full investigation of Whisper large v3
hallucination detection utilizing HALAS is presented in [29].
Table 3 presents a comparison of detector performance on
the HALAStestsplit. Surprisingly, the reference-free DE de-
tectors significantly outperformed both LLM-based models, de-
spite the LLMs having direct access to the ground-truth ref-
erence texts. The two LLM models achieved very similar F1
scores, but through different flaws, with GPT-4o mini having
low Precision and Flash 2 having low Recall. Proxy met-
ric detectors perform strongly without decoder embedding ac-
cess (ALL) and even without target model data (OTHER). The
multi-layer DE detector outperformed the single-layer baseline,
improving Recall and achieving the highest F1 score of 56.1%.
Using the non-speech-augmented dataset from [4], where
any ASR insertion relative to the reference is considered a hal-
lucination, we evaluated the cross-domain generalization of the
DE detectors trained on HALAS. As shown in Table 4, the DE
detectors achieved a higher F1 score on these data than on the
more difficult HALAS. This implies that HALAS can be used
for the training of generalizable hallucination detectors and that
its focus on difficult speech examples presents a challenging
benchmark for detectors.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we introduced HALAS, the first dataset of human-
annotated ASR hallucinations on real-speech recordings. Our
analysis shows that all seven evaluated state-of-the-art ASR
models are prone to hallucinations, with generated errors ex-
hibiting strong cross-model similarities and distributions heav-
ily skewed toward a small set of phrases. We demonstrate the
utility of the dataset by benchmarking common metrics along-
side state-of-the-art detection methods, showing the difficulty
of reliable hallucination detection, and establishing HALAS as
a challenging benchmark for future research.
6https://docs.cloud.google.com/
gemini-enterprise-agent-platform/models/gemini/
2-0-flash
6701
6. Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Science Cen-
tre, Poland under Grant 2021/42/E/ST7/00452, the National
Centre for Research and Development, Poland under Grant
INFOSTRATEG-IV/0029/2022, and by program ”Excellence
initiative – research university” for the AGH University of
Krakow. We gratefully acknowledge Polish high-performance
computing infrastructure PLGrid (HPC Centers: ACK Cyfronet
AGH) for providing computer facilities and support within com-
putational Grants PLG/2025/018799 and PLG/2025/018238,
and HumanSignal [30] for allowing use of their platform for
annotation.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
The authors used large language models (ChatGPT, Gemini,
Claude) to assist with language editing. All experimental de-
sign, data processing, statistical analysis, and scientific con-
clusions were independently conducted and verifi