Scaling few-shot spoken word classification with generative meta-continual
learning
Louise Beyers ID 1,∗,∗∗, Batsirayi Mupamhi Ziki ID 1,∗, Ruan van der Merwe ID 1
1 Bytefuse
louise@beyers.co.za, batsi.ziki@bytefuse.ai, ruan.vdmerwe@bytefuse.ai
Abstract
Few-shot spoken word classification has largely been devel-
oped for applications where a small number of classes is consid-
ered, and so the potential of larger-scale few-shot spoken word
classification remains untapped. This paper investigates the po-
tential of a spoken word classifier to sequentially learn to dis-
tinguish between1 000classes when it is given only five shots
per class. We demonstrate that this scaling capability exists by
training a model using the Generative Meta-Continual Learn-
ing (GeMCL) algorithm and comparing it to repeatedly trained
or finetuned baselines. We find that GeMCL produces excep-
tionally stable performance, and although it does not always
outperform a repeatedly fully-finetuned HuBERT model nor a
frozen HuBERT model with a repeatedly trained classifier head,
it produces comparable performance to the latter while adapting
2 000times faster, having been trained on less than half of the
data for two orders of magnitude less time.
Index Terms: spoken word classification, keyword spotting,
meta-learning, continual learning, meta-continual learning
1. Introduction
Spoken word classification is often researched in the context of
keyword spotting (KWS) - specifically in the scenario where
users are allowed to define their own keywords, and the model
must adapt to the new words with only a few labelled shots
[1, 2, 3, 4]. While this problem is usually formulated as an
open-set classification problem [5, 6, 7, 8], spoken word classi-
fication is generally closed-set [9, 3, 4]; if we guarantee that all
unseen words will be provided with labels from the user, then
the open-set classification problem can be turned into a closed-
set problem, with the addition of a continual learning aspect [3].
Spoken word classification evaluation in this setting is partially
driven by the requirements of edge devices [10, 8, 2, 1] and is
often tested on a small number of classes at a time, since a key-
word system often does not require there to be many possible
classes at a time [9, 7] and even at small numbers of classes, we
observe limitations in performance [1].
However, if few-shot, continually learning spoken word
classifiers are able to scale to large amounts of classes, the scope
of the problems to which they may be applied expands signif-
icantly, from adding twenty new keywords to a keyword spot-
ting system to potentially creating a data labelling flywheel for
moderately-resourced languages.
The requirements for such a system are twofold: good per-
formance given access to only a moderate amount of data from
the same distribution, and an unprecedented ability to generalise
to words not seen in the training data.
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
Meta-continual learning is a framework that fulfils these re-
quirements as it lies at the intersection of meta-learning, tradi-
tionally used for few-shot classification [11, 12, 13], and contin-
ual learning, and can be defined as learning how to continually
learn [14]. Generative Meta-Continual Learning (GeMCL) [15]
uses a generative classifier, and is a generalisation of prototyp-
ical networks [11]. There is a precedent for using prototypical
networks for both versions of the user-defined KWS problem
[8, 7, 6, 2, 9] particularly in practice because they take away the
need to finetune. They have also been used to produce a model
robust to numbers of shots and classes [9].
There is also a precedent for using meta-learning and meta-
continual learning for few-shot continual spoken word classifi-
cation to improve generalisation [3, 4]. Although meta-learning
algorithms are often trained from scratch, they may be less data-
hungry than infamously data-hungry foundation models such as
HuBERT [16] and Wav2Vec2 [17], which would make them a
more reasonable alternative when we cannot expect to rely on
transfer learning from out-of-distribution data. Another alterna-
tive investigated by [7] combines large self-supervised models
with meta-trained projectors and classifier heads.
GeMCL isolates the class-specific parameters and is there-
fore immune to catastrophic forgetting [15]. We therefore hy-
pothesise that it may be able to generalise and scale beyond the
approaches tried so far. We thus train the meta-continual learn-
ing algorithm GeMCL [15] on the Multilingual Spoken Words
Corpus (MSWC) [18] dataset.
In line with the findings of [19] on appropriate baselines for
continual learning, we produce baselines by selecting two adap-
tation strategies and applying them to the popular pre-trained
([5, 7, 20]) HuBERTbasemodel. For the first baseline we
perform full finetuning of the pre-trained model, and for the
second we train a classifier head on the pre-trained model. Hu-
BERTbasehas significantly more data and compute available
for training than our implementation of GeMCL, though its data
source does not match the test distribution. GeMCL has access
to data which is lower in quantity but more relevant to the task
at hand. Comparing the models is therefore not only a compar-
ison of algorithms, but of strategies: given enough data to train
GeMCL but not enough data or compute to train HuBERT from
scratch, is it more practical to finetune a large self-supervised
model like HuBERT or is training GeMCL from scratch a vi-
able option in terms of accuracy and compute?
Our contribution is to answer this question by comparing
the two algorithms in a setting which matches practical require-
ments: the models must perform continual learning, they only
have access to few (5) shots per word to do so, and they must be
able to scale the number of words they can classify. We are the
first to our knowledge to report on the application of GeMCL
on speech data, as well as the first to report results for few-shot
4111
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-408
Support Set Query
Set
Cross Entropy
Loss...
Update Meta-parameters
Update
...
...
...
Figure 1:A single step in the meta-training procedure of GeMCL. Each task is anN-way-K-shot episode. The encoder,f ϕ, embeds
the input. The support set is used to calculate the class statistics from the embeddings. The matrix ˜Xcontains the samples from the
combined query set of all classes, totallingMsamples, whereas the vector ˜Ycontains the corresponding labels. The model produces
a vector ˆYcontainingMpredictions. The cross-entropy loss is calculated, and used to update the meta-parameters.
spoken word classification for as many as1 000classes at one
time. Our contribution is also distinctive in that we test at mul-
tiple points during the continual learning process, so that we are
able to report on per-class continual learning stability.
2. Methodology
We discuss GeMCL, our baselines and specify how we evaluate
for a continual learning scenario.
2.1. GeMCL
We provide a short overview of the GeMCL algorithm; refer to
[15] and [21] for more details.
GeMCL consists of an encoder followed by a generative
classifier that models the distribution of each class in the em-
bedding space. In a continual learning setting, new data ar-
rives sequentially and the distribution of a class evolves as new
samples are observed. GeMCL adopts a Bayesian approach in
which each class is represented by a prior distribution that gets
updated to a posterior after observing new data. Each class dis-
tribution is modelled as a Gaussian. The Gaussians collectively
form a Gaussian mixture model.
For classc, the mean (µ c∈R d) and precision (λc∈R d
+)
are modelled by Normal-Gamma distribution
P(µc,λc|θ 0)∝
dY
i=1
N
 
µc
i|µ 0,(κ 0λc
i)−1
Ga
 
λc
i|α 0,β 0

,
(1)
whereθ 0 ={α 0,β 0,κ 0,µ 0}are parameters of the Normal-
Gamma distribution, encoding our prior belief over the class
distributions. The initial values of the parameters represent the
prior. In practice the prior distribution forµ c is flat and unin-
formative; therefore,κ 0 = 0andµ 0 = 0. Since the Normal-
gamma is the conjugate prior to the Gaussian likelihood, the
posterior remains in the same family, allowing parameters to be
updated in closed form via Bayes’ rule. Assume that we receive
thenth sample from classc, then the element-wise update rule
for the parameters is as follows [15],
κc
n =n,(2)
µc
n,i = 1
n
nX
i=1
zi = ¯zn,i,(3)
αc
n =α 0 + n
2,(4)
βc
n,i =β 0 + n
2 (¯γn,i−¯z2
n,i),(5)
wherez i is an element of the embedded inputz∈R d and
¯γn,i = 1
n
Pn
i=1z2
i .
These updates are class-specific, allowing previously
learned class parameters to remain unaffected by new obser-
vations from different classes. For an embedding inputz, the
predicted labelˆyis
ˆy= argmax
y
P(z|α y
n,βy
n,µy
n,κy
n),(6)
wherePis a Student’s t-distribution. GeMCL makes use of
meta-learning to train the encoder to maximise its representa-
tional capacity and to obtain the prior beliefsβ 0 andα 0.
Meta-learning can be described by two phases: meta-
training and meta-testing. Meta-training involves training the
model on a distribution of tasks whereas meta-testing is eval-
uating whether the model can generalise to new, unseen tasks.
The parameters of the encoder and the parametersβ 0 andα 0
are optimised during meta-training and are known as the meta-
parameters.
A single step in meta-training involves a model learning a
task sampled from the task distribution. Each task in the train-
ing distribution is a classification episode containingNclasses,
withKtraining samples for each class, which we call the sup-
port set. This is known as anN-way-K-shot episode.
During anN-way-K-shot episode the model learns one
class at a time by embedding all the shots of that class and
then calculating the Normal-Gamma distribution of that class
by making use of equations (2) - (5). Each class also has a query
set, where we use cross-entropy to calculate the query set loss.
The combined query set loss over each episode is then used
4112
to update the meta-parameters. Figure 1 illustrates the meta-
training procedure of GeMCL.
During meta-testing the meta-parameters are frozen and we
evaluate the model onN-way-K-shot episodes in which none
of the classes were seen during meta-training.
2.2. HuBERT baselines
The pre-trained HuBERTbasemodel checkpoint [16] ob-
tained from the Huggingface Hub is chosen as the starting point
for our baselines as it is known to produce strong representa-
tions of speech [5, 7, 20]. We choose two methods of adapting
the HuBERTbaseencoder - full finetuning and training a clas-
sifier head and projector on a frozen backbone - to contextualise
the performance of GeMCL.
To fully finetune HuBERT, we allow updates to all param-
eters during finetuning. This affords maximum flexibility and
prevents the model from being limited by representations that
are optimised for a different distribution, and so provides a mea-
sure of how well we can transfer knowledge in a scenario with
full flexibility. However, full finetuning is known to be sensi-
tive to the choice of hyperparameters, and so it trades stability
for performance.
Our other baseline trains a classifier head on top of a frozen
HuBERT model, to test whether the combination of a strong en-
coder and weak classifier can perform continual learning. This
baseline tests how well a customisable classifier head can per-
form given a strong encoder. Although this affords less flexibil-
ity, it is far cheaper and more robust, since no previously-trained
parameters are updated.
2.3. Evaluating for continual learning
Many studies concerning class-incremental continual learning
[22] test the performance of a model only once during the con-
tinual learning process: at the end. Catastrophic forgetting can
then be detected by comparing the order in which a class is
learned to the performance of the model on the class.
However, in a practical continual learning setting, a model
might be updated and deployed multiple times. This motivates
reporting how the accuracy of a model changes over time. We
therefore test all models at intermediate points of the continual
learning process on the classes they have seen by those points.
Figure 2 illustrates how evaluation of the models differs.
Since GeMCL can ingest support sets for different classes inde-
pendently, there is no additional learning cost associated with
evaluating at different stages of learning. However, our base-
lines must be finetuned from scratch each time new classes are
considered. There can be an additional hyperparameter tuning
cost associated with this. The baselines therefore do not provide
a comparison in terms of adaptability, but they instead provide
a measure of the possible performance that can be achieved if
you allow training on all classes at once, instead of sequentially.
3. Experimental setup
We describe the data, architectures, training methods and eval-
uation methods used to compare GeMCL to a fully finetuned
HuBERT (full FT) and frozen HuBERT model with a finetuned
classifier head and projector (CH).
3.1. Data
We use English data from the Multilingual Spoken Words cor-
pus (MSWC) [18] dataset, which provides one-second-long la-
Baselines
for 
Pre-train
Hyperparameter
Tuning
Fine-tune on classes Evaluate on classes
GeMCL
Hyperparameter
Tuning
Meta-train
Calculate statistics
for classes Evaluate on classes
if 
Figure 2:A comparison of the training and evaluation flows of
the baselines and GeMCL
belled audio segments of individual words. A train/dev/test split
is provided which splits on samples, and has all words in all
splits. We only use the test and train splits. After filtering for
valid links and words with at least five test and train recordings
in the original dataset’s split, we are left with12 736words. We
split these words in a 70-30 ratio for meta-training and meta-
testing, respectively. We use five shots per word for training,
validation and testing, sampled from the training, training and
test splits respectively.
3.2. GeMCL model and training
Our GeMCL implementation, inspired by Lee et al.’s imple-
mentation [21], employs a 12-layer-12-head transformer en-
coder backbone which takes mel-frequency cepstral coefficients
(MFCCs) as input, producing a model with85 066 756parame-
ters. MFCCs are extracted from waveforms sampled at 16 kHz,
using a frame length of 25 ms, a frame shift of 10 ms, and 40
mel filterbanks. We retain the first 13 cepstral coefficients.
We train GeMCL on the8 915reserved meta-train words
of the dataset for5 000steps on batches of16 25-way-5-shot
episodes. GeMCL is therefore fed10million samples - about
2 778hours - though not all samples seen may be unique. We
simulate our sampling procedure for500iterations, giving an
average of about1 715 842unique samples: about477hours of
training data.
3.3. Baseline models and training
For both baselines, we use the pre-trained HuBERTbase
model with an added projector and classifier head. The
model parameters range from94 575 001(for25classes) to
94 825 576(for1 000classes). HuBERTbasewas pre-trained
on960hours of data from LibriSpeech [23]. The baselines take
raw waveform as input, padded with zeros to the maximum
length of a sample in a batch. We train both baselines with a
cross-entropy objective for200epochs if the number of classes
is below300, and500epochs if the number of classes is above
300. The batch size is32and we use the AdamW [24] optimiser
for both models. We perform training runs, each starting from
the HuBERTbasecheckpoint, for sets of classes in the range
[25,1 000]where the number of classes is incremented by25,
as illustrated by Figure 2. For each training run, the dimension
of the classifier head output is the number of classes considered
at that point. The learning rate for the CH model is 3×10 −4 and
4113
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
350
375
400
425
450
475
500
525
550
575
600
625
650
675
700
725
750
775
800
825
850
875
900
925
950
975
1000
Number of Classes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Average Accuracy
 Full FT CH GeMCL
Figure 3:The average accuracy of GeMCL, full FT and the CH models with95%confidence intervals.
for the full FT model the learning rate is dependent on the num-
ber of classes being learned. The only other difference between
the baselines is that for the CH model, the only trainable param-
eters are the projector and classifier head, whereas for the full
FT model all parameters are trainable.
3.4. Evaluation
We evaluate all models by exposing them to a support set of five
shots per class (for GeMCL this means calculating class statis-
tics, for the baselines this means finetuning, see Figure 2) for
a number of classes and then recording their accuracy on five
unseen shots (the query set) from each of those classes. We do
so for 25 classes, then add 25 classes and repeat the process
until we reach1 000classes. We repeat this for ten different
selections of1 000classes from the meta-test set of words, each
of which we call an episode. We report on the average accu-
racy over words and episodes, as well as the average change in
accuracy per-word between consecutive points in the continual
learning process.
We also report the hours spent on tuning, training and few-
shot adaptation for each model.
4. Results
Figure 3 illustrates the accuracy of GeMCL compared to the
full FT and CH models. The full FT baseline is able at most
stages of continual learning to outperform CH and GeMCL, but
the fluctuation in the confidence intervals for full FT show that
it is not very stable. This observation is further supported by
Table 1, which shows that the percentage accuracy of full FT
on a word between two stages of the continual learning process
changes by about 25 % on average.
Table 1:Per-word volatility of classification accuracy. Given
accuracy in %, volatility is the mean absolute amount that ac-
curacy changes between consecutive continual learning steps.
GeMCL CH Full FT
Volatility (mean)0.48 7.13 24.55
Volatility (stddev)±3.32±13.63±39.25
On the other hand, GeMCL produces the most stable per-
word accuracy, fluctuating less on average by at least one order
of magnitude than CH and full FT. GeMCL outperforms CH
for all increments of classes below450, and underperforms CH
at700classes, as well as all increments of classes above750
(significantly, according to a two-sided Mann-Whitney U test
withα= 0.05).
Despite only ever being trained to distinguish25classes at
a time, GeMCL only underperforms1 000-way-finetuned CH
by about2%.
Further, GeMCL takes less time for training, tuning and
few-shot adaptation. We report the time taken for each of these
in Table 2.
Table 2:Time taken in hours on a single GPU - the HuBERT
numbers are calculated from100k steps taking approximately
9.5hours on 32 GPUs. The hours reported are cumulative - the
adaptation time is taken over all shots ingested.
GeMCL CH Full FT
Meta- / Pre-train27.55∼1 976∼1 976
Hyperparameter search15.29 40.26 70.00
Few-shot adaptation0.06 124.25 185.96
Table 2 shows how much time was used, given a single GPU
as a resource, to train and hyperparameter tune the three mod-
els, and to adapt them to the support set. The time used for
the baselines for finetuning is exacerbated by two things: first,
finetuning started from scratch each time the number of classes
was incremented, and second, validation was performed more
frequently than necessary. Even so, in comparison to the time
taken for GeMCL to calculate prototypes, the baselines took
very long to adapt.
5. Conclusion
We compared the generative meta-continual learning algorithm,
GeMCL, trained from scratch on about477hours of labelled
spoken word data, to two baselines based on the HuBERTbase
model, originally trained in an unsupervised way on960hours
of speech data. We evaluated all models on 5-shot spoken word
classification tasks, scaling up to1 000classes in a continual
learning setting. GeMCL was able to achieve accuracy within
3%of the most practically viable baseline model on1 000
classes, while being a true continual learner - in other words, it
requires no retraining when new words arrive, rather a closed-
form update to word class statistics. Additionally, GeMCL’s
accuracy on any given word remains remarkably stable as new
words are added, in contrast to the HuBERT baselines, which
produce unstable per-word performance; GeMCL is therefore
more suitable and predictable for real world deployment. These
findings support the viability of GeMCL to be used for spoken
word classification in a continual learning setup where the num-
ber of classes to be learned scales. Future work could expand
these findings past just English systems and investigate the per-
formance of other continual learning algorithms at scale.
4114
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI assistance was used in producing the code for ex-
periments of this paper, as well as for providing a starting point
for some of the figures which appear in this paper. Generative
AI assistance was not used to write this paper.