The Sound of Code-Switching: Prosodic Profiles of Spontaneous
Spanish-English Speech
Debasmita Bhattacharya1,∗,∗∗, Michela Marchini2,∗, Julia Hirschberg1
1Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, USA
2Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan, USA
debasmita.b@cs.columbia.edu, mchini@umich.edu, julia@cs.columbia.edu
Abstract
Code-switching (CSW) has been studied via many linguistic
frameworks, but little is known about theprosodyof such mul-
tilingual speech. We ask: Is CSW prosodically different from
monolingual productions in spontaneous conversation, and how
are variations influenced by speaker proficiency and the multi-
lingual properties of such speech? To answer these, we examine
a large-scale Spanish-English corpus over a host of language-
independent prosodic features, finding that CSW prosody dif-
fers meaningfully from monolingual prosody in both English
and Spanish, with greater influence on this variation coming
from speaker-specific factors. Our work is the first to apply such
a language-generalizable, macro-level, and model-diagnostic
approach to studying spontaneous CSW prosody, and provides
novel insights into multilinguality that have potential implica-
tions for the synthesis of naturalistic code-switched speech.
Index Terms: code-switching, multilingual, prosodic analysis
1. Motivation
Speakers whocode-switchalternate between multiple language
varieties during conversation [1]. Code-switching (CSW) can
be performed between or within utterances and is prevalent
among the growing majority of global multilingual speakers,
particularly in spontaneous, informal speech. Spoken CSW has
been studied through various computational frameworks, span-
ning morpho-syntactic analyses [2, 3], socio- and paralinguis-
tic investigations [4, 5], and discourse-functional studies [6, 7].
In contrast, relatively little is known about theprosodicnature
of code-switched speech, leaving great scope for exploring this
uniquely spoken dimension of CSW. While recent work has be-
gun to study prosody in multilingual domains [8], our under-
standing of how CSW compares prosodically to monolingual
speech in any of the involved languages remains incomplete.
Prior work on this topic has taken aperception-oriented
approach, proposing that phonetic cues such as pitch accent,
speaking rate, and voice onset time (VOT) allow listeners to an-
ticipate switches in Spanish- and Mandarin-English [9, 10, 11].
In some cases, however, it is unclear whether these cues are the
same as those actually produced differently by bilingual speak-
ers. To address this, other studies have focused on prosodic pat-
terns in speechproduction, showing that code-switches tend to
occur across, rather than within, intonational units in Spanish-
English [12, 13, 14], but these have provided limited insight into
the prosodic characteristics of CSW itself.
Among studies specifically investigating the nature of CSW
prosody, claims range from CSW being no different from mono-
lingual prosody in French- and Spanish-English [14, 15], to
*Equal contribution.
**Corresponding author.
CSW as fundamentally distinct from monolingual speech in
terms of prosodic-syntactic factors [13]. Intermediate claims
suggestprosodic blendingin CSW; evidence includes the pres-
ence of intonational contours from both languages in Spanish-
English utterances [9]. Further segmental work has studied hy-
perarticulation of French- and Spanish-English vowels during
CSW [16, 17] and VOT in Greek-English [18], showing that
these effects can vary by social context and speaker language
dominance [18, 19]. However, the role of language proficiency
on CSW prosody is less conclusive among balanced bilinguals
with roughly equal proficiency across languages [20, 21].
Despite the breadth of related work, it is difficult to gener-
alize about the nature of CSW prosody. All of the above stud-
ies, except for [13], examined onlyreadspeech produced by a
handful of speakers, with most analyses done either over single
lexical items or phonemes in isolation, sometimes within spe-
cific syntactic constraints, or over a few features from a narrow
prosodic class. This has resulted in insightful but contradictory
and very specialized analyses focused on elicited speech.
We propose to fill the gap in our understanding ofnaturally-
occurringCSW prosody by applying a uniquely macro-level
approach to studying the prosodic productions of Spanish-
English bilingual speakers in a large-scale corpus of CSW.
We examine the extent of variation between code-switched
and monolingual prosodic profiles across both represented lan-
guages and whether any differences can be explained by speaker
demographic attributes or multilingual linguistic characteristics.
Specifically, we askRQ1:Is there utterance-level variation
across a suite of language-independent pitch, energy, and du-
ration features between code-switched and monolingual spon-
taneous speech? And,RQ2:How is this variation influenced
by(a)speaker proficiency and(b)the linguistic characteristics
of multilingual speech? To address theseRQs, we build on [8]
and find that CSW prosody differs meaningfully from monolin-
gual prosody in both Spanish and English, with speaker-specific
factors exhibiting stronger influence than multilingual linguistic
attributes. Overall, we show how and explain why spontaneous
CSW is prosodicallydistinctfrom monolingual speech. Our
main contribution is a clearly interpretable, novel insight into
the prosodic nuances of spontaneous CSW, which has impor-
tant applications in naturalistic multilingual speech synthesis.
2. Method
Data.We examine the Bangor Miami corpus (BM) of spon-
taneous Spanish-English speech [22]. BM contains 35 hours
of recorded dialogue from 56 conversations and 46,900 tran-
scribed utterances –∼2,400 code-switched,∼30,700 English,
∼13,800 Spanish – exchanged between 84 adult speakers from
Miami, Florida, USA. Speakers converse informally on shared
2968
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-249
Figure 1:p-values for prosodic feature distribution comparisons between code-switched and combined monolingual English & Spanish
(top), monolingual English (middle), and monolingual Spanish (bottom) utterances. Blue indicates statistical significance; red indicates
insignificance. Associated Cohen’sdvalues generally fall within0.2< d <0.8(i.e. small to medium effects) for significant features.
topics (e.g., family life, relationships, hobbies), and each pro-
duce utterances in monolingual English, monolingual Spanish,
and code-switched Spanish-English, which are manually anno-
tated with word-level language identification (LID) tags. BM
also includes demographic information on each speaker, cover-
ing their language of schooling, years of language experience,
self-reported ability in each language, and each of their parents’
primary language. We operationalize language proficiency via
these metadata indicators (see [23] for details), noting that BM
lacks native language information and that speakers are roughly
balanced bilinguals with slight dominance in one language.
Feature extraction.We extract and vectorize the DisV oice
set of 103 utterance-level prosodic features derived from three
categories – fundamental frequency (F0), energy, and duration –
each comprising multiple feature types1 computed via six func-
tionals2 across voiced and unvoiced segments. Duration fea-
tures also include pause segments; F0 and energy features are
computed over initial and final syllables of segments. For con-
sistency with prior work [8], we extract features from denoised
BM data [24]. We also measure utterance-level CSW richness,
i.e. quantity and frequency, with M- and I-indices [25, 26], and
use prior annotations [24] of CSW direction (en→esvs.es→
en) and strategy (insertionalvs.alternational[27]).
Statistical testing.We compare these utterance-level
prosodic feature distributions of monolingual English and Span-
ish to those of code-switched Spanish-English over multiple
subsets of the data using feature-level independentt-tests with
the Benjamini-Hochberg correction method. We support these
with Cohen’sdeffect sizes andz-tests of proportions.
Modeling.We perform complementary 1) unsupervised
and 2) supervised model analyses. For 1), we use ascikit-
learn 1.6.1k-means clustering model with default hyper-
parameters. For 2), we follow [8] and use LID as a tool for
understanding prosody; we treatWhisper-base[28] as a
prosodic-LID model and evaluate its binary classification per-
formance. This 74M parameter model was pre-trained for
monolingual speech recognition in 97 languages, but allows ac-
cess to intermediate LID tokens, which we restrict to English
and Spanish to enforce binary evaluation. We study this model’s
off-the-shelf and fine-tuned LID performance using a 90/10
fine-tuning/inference split of speaker-level CSW BM data, and
select the fine-tuned model checkpoint that minimizes loss.
1See full set at https://disvoice.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Prosody.html
2Mean, standard deviation, maximum, minimum, skew, kurtosis.
3. Results
3.1. CSW differs prosodically from monolingual speech.
We first explore whether CSW prosody differs from monolin-
gual prosody. We find that the bulk of prosodic features in code-
switched utterances are significantly different (p <0.05) from
the same ones in monolingual English and Spanish, both when
considered together and separately (Figure 1). Across compar-
isons, duration features drive the majority of this prosodic vari-
ation in CSW, as at least 96% of these vary significantly from
their counterparts in monolingual speech. Energy features are
the next most important, with no less than 87.5% of features
differing significantly from corresponding monolingual speech.
Pitch features contribute the least, as up to 30% of these features
are similar to their monolingual analogues. These group-level
patterns are the opposite of those found in [8], and help to distin-
guish the prosody of monolingual speech within a multilingual
discourse context from that of multilingual speech itself.
We next inspect these prosodic differences more closely
and highlight key observations from qualitative comparisons
between code-switched and monolingual speech. F0 contours
of initial and final voiced segments generally have higher mean
values in code-switched utterances than in monolingual ones,
with greater variance in code-switched F0, particularly for ini-
tial segments. This is true relative to both monolingual English
and Spanish, with consistently greater∆s between CSW and
Spanish than between CSW and English. In terms of energy,
initial (Figure 2a) and final voiced segments have lower mean
and maximum values in CSW relative to monolingual speech
in both languages. This is also true for minimum energy in
unvoiced segments. Additionally, across voiced and unvoiced
segments of CSW, variance in energy features is greater than in
monolingual utterances. Finally, the mean and standard devia-
tion in duration of voiced (Figure 2b) and unvoiced segments,
and duration of pauses, are greater during CSW than in mono-
lingual English and Spanish. The ratio of duration of pauses to
combined voiced and unvoiced segments is also higher in CSW
than monolingual speech. Cumulatively, we find that CSW
tends to sound higher-pitched, quieter, and more disjointed than
both monolingual English and Spanish. The consistent pattern
of heightenedvarianceacross code-switched prosodic feature
groups is striking, and echoes prior work on the diagnostic value
of feature spread over absolute feature values [29].
Having found prosodic patterns that distinguish CSW from
monolingual speech in both English and Spanish, we exam-
2969
(a)
 (b)
Figure 2:Visualizing trends in (a) mean energy and (b) mean
duration of intial voiced segments across utterance types.
ine whether these are salient enough for a simple unsuper-
vised model to learn and apply, providing a supplementary,
assumption-free test of the findings above. Ourk-means (k=
2; 206 params.) clustering model demonstrates reasonable abil-
ity to do so in multiple clustering scenarios, achieving∼85%
accuracy on differentiating code-switched and monolingual ut-
terances based on prosody alone (Table 1). Visual inspection
(e.g., Figure 3) confirms a distinct boundary between code-
switched and monolingual clusters across relevant features, re-
inforcing that CSW prosody is reliably separable from mono-
lingual speech. Overall, our statistical, qualitative, and un-
supervised modeling results provide complementary evidence
of meaningful prosodic differences between spontaneous CSW
and monolingual speech, motivating the remainder of the work.
Table 1:k-means clustering accuracy across comparison set-
tings. The first row is a baseline forz-tests of proportions.
Comparison Accuracyp-value w.r.t. baseline
envs.es0.636 –
(en+es) vs. CSW 0.843p≪0.05
envs. CSW 0.837p≪0.05
esvs. CSW 0.868p≪0.05
Figure 3:Clustering all monolingual (blue) vs. code-switched
(green) utterances. Axes represent the relevance of selected
prosodic feature groups post-PCA; the highest loadings for PC1
(x-axis) and PC2 (y-axis) correspond to greater mean , max.,
and SD in energy and pitch features. Visualizations for cluster-
ing English vs. CSW and Spanish vs. CSW are almost identical.
3.2. Prosodic variation in CSW is shaped by speaker-level
language proficiency characteristics.
We now ask whether speaker language proficiency explains the
prosodic differences found above. Since prior work disagrees
on the influence of speaker proficiency on prosody [18, 20], we
examine proficiency indicators relative to group-level prosodic
features. First, we identify which language proficiency fac-
tors correspond to the greatest prosodic differences across de-
mographic groups. Recall that demographic variables span
speaker linguistic ability and language exposure factors (details
in Section 2). We then apply these findings towards examining
whether CSW prosody more closely resembles the monolingual
prosody of speakers’ higher-proficiency language, as indicated
by the most salient demographic factors found.
To begin, we construct two comparison groups for each
language proficiency feature: for categorical features, we bin
speakers according to their indicated language (esoren); for
continuous ones, we assign speakers to groups based on their
reportedes:enratio value (>1:es;<1:en). Across each
pair of comparison groups for a given proficiency feature, we
then compare prosodic feature distributions over each of three
utterance types: 1) CSW, 2) monolingual English, and 3) mono-
lingual Spanish. Thus, in each of the three cases, we compare
prosodic productions of thesametype of utterance between
speakers with opposite proficiency attributes.
Language proficiency factors generally correspond to
prosodic differences in monolingual speech across speaker
groups, but do not show consistent effects within CSW. For ex-
ample, over 80% of prosodic features differ significantly across
Spanish utterances produced by speakers with English-medium
secondary schooling relative to those with Spanish-medium sec-
ondary schooling. The extent of differences is 85% over English
utterances for the same comparison. Similarly, when comparing
speakers with English-medium vs. Spanish-medium primary
schooling, we find significant differences in over 72% and 77%
of prosodic features across monolingual English and Spanish
utterances, respectively. In contrast, for code-switched utter-
ances, the only language proficiency factor for which a majority
(51%) of prosodic features differ significantly between speaker
groups is years of experience. In sum, language proficiency ap-
pears to play a greater role in shaping prosodic variation within
monolingual, rather than code-switched, speech. Further, we
find the greatest such prosodic variation when proficiency is de-
fined categorically by language of schooling.
Based on these findings, we hypothesize that speakers pro-
duce CSW prosody that ismore similarto the monolingual
prosody of theirhigher-proficiencylanguage, as indicated by
their primary and secondary school media. Consistent with our
hypothesis, speakers whose primary school medium was Span-
ish show fewer significant differences between their CSW and
Spanish prosody than between their CSW and English prosody
(∆ = 16%). The same pattern holds for secondary schooling
in Spanish (∆ = 15%). Similarly, for speakers with schooling
in English, we find fewer differences between their CSW and
English prosody than between their CSW and Spanish prosody,
at both primary (∆ = 9%) and secondary (∆ = 10%) lev-
els. These∆s are all statistically significant (z-test:p <0.05)
and correspond to 15-20% of baseline significant differences
between monolingual English and Spanish prosodic features
in each comparison, suggesting a moderate but meaningful re-
lationship between language proficiency and the prosodic na-
ture of CSW. This relationship is stronger among speakers with
greater Spanish proficiency, tying directly into previous findings
on CSW linguistic behavior and language proficiency in BM
[23]. So, we have preliminary indications of speaker-level char-
acteristics that may drive prosodic differences between CSW
and monolingual speech.
We now use prosodic-LID as a diagnostic tool to assess
the strength of this association. Specifically, if CSW prosody
reflects speaker proficiency, a binary classifier that has inter-
nalized this relationship should identify a code-switched utter-
ance by a Spanish-proficient speaker as monolingual Spanish,
and one produced by an English-proficient speaker as mono-
lingual English, given prosodic CSW inputs and only these 2
2970
output classes. Thus, we use prosodic-LID as a proxy to iden-
tify which language CSW resemblesmoreamong speakers with
unambiguous school-basedesvs.enproficiency.
Table 2:Pre-trained (PT) and fine-tuned (FT) model accuracy
and class-wise F1 score on binary prosodic-LID. The fine-tuned
model uses an additional classifier head (CH) in one setting.
Model Accuracy F1-Score
en es
Whisper-base(PT) 0.64 0.74 0.44
Whisper-base(FT) 0.83 0.86 0.77
Whisper-base(FT + CH) 0.92 0.93 0.89
TheWhisper-basemodel’s off-the-shelf (baseline) per-
formance is underwhelming on prosodic-LID for code-switched
speech (Table 2), with poor generalization between language
classes despite balanced test data. We fine-tune the model 3 on
BM CSW data to improve LID performance, and find that it
significantly outperforms its pre-trained baseline (p <0.01),
though performance remains modest. Such performance may
be due to the model’s original sequence labeling objective, ren-
dering it imperfect for direct application to our classification
task. To tackle this, we append a linear classifier head to its
encoder, which leads to significant improvement (p <0.01)
in performance on the held-out test set of unseen speakers, both
overall and for each language individually. This final set of fine-
tuned results suggests that the model may well learn how CSW
prosody and language proficiency are related, reinforcing the
role of speaker characteristics in shaping prosodic variation in
CSW and providing support for the salience of this relationship.
3.3. Prosodic variation in CSW is influenced by linguistic
properties of multilingual speech.
Finally, we ask whether the properties of CSW itself – its
quantity, frequency, direction, and strategy – further explain
differences between code-switched and monolingual prosody.
First, we check whether the prosody of utterances containing
abundant or frequent code-switches differs from monolingual
speech to a greater extent than that of utterances containing
sparing or infrequent code-switches. We aggregate utterance-
level richness metrics (M- and I-indices) by speaker to construct
groups of high vs. low-quantity and -frequency code-switchers,
binning a speaker [above/below] the corpus-level median for
each metric in the corresponding [high/low] group. We find
that high-quantity code-switchers show greater (or equal) pro-
portions of significant feature-level differences between their
CSW and monolingual prosody compared to low-quantity code-
switchers (∆ = 10%for English;∆ = 0%for Spanish). This
pattern replicates for high- vs. low-frequency code-switchers
(∆ = 9%for English;∆ = 0%for Spanish), and is more
notable for differences between CSW and English. Both non-
zero∆s correspond toz-testp-values below 0.05, and about
11% of baseline corpus-level significant differences between
monolingual English and Spanish. This pattern suggests that
prosodic differences between code-switched and monolingual
speech may be slightly enhanced with greater CSW richness.
Next, we examine whether prosodic differences relative to
monolingual speech are more pronounced ines→enoren→es
CSW. In comparisons to both monolingual Spanish and English,
3All fine-tuning and inference takes<1hour on a T4 GPU. Fine-
tuning batch size: 8; epochs: 5; learning rate: 1e-5 (FT), 5e-5 (FT+CH).
es→enshows slightly more variation than doesen→esCSW.
However, absolute differences in variation between directions
(about 3%) are not significant according toz-tests, so our re-
sults fail to support a relationship between CSW direction and
prosodic variation relative to monolingual speech in this corpus.
Finally, inspired by [30], we examine whether code-
switched prosodic differences depend on the CSW strategy in
use. Relative to English, insertional CSW differs from mono-
lingual speech to a similar extent to alternational CSW from the
same (∆ = 4%;z-test:p >0.05). In contrast, relative to Span-
ish, insertional CSW differs from monolingual speech more
than alternational CSW does (∆ = 10%;z-test:p <0.05;
≡17%of baseline prosodic differences between the two strate-
gies), with relevant differences concentrated in pitch and du-
ration features. Though somewhat mixed, these results pro-
vide promising indications that CSW strategy may indeed play
a role in shaping prosodic variation in CSW. Overall, among the
properties studied, variation in CSW richness and strategy drive
most of the differences that distinguish CSW and monolingual
prosody; CSW direction appears not to play an influential role.
These preliminary findings provide additional support for CSW
differing prosodically from monolingual speech and contribute
an additional explanatory dimension for this phenomenon.
4. Discussion
Most prior studies of prosody have focused on monolingual
speech settings. The findings of those on CSW prosody have
been difficult to generalize (see Section 1). Our work adds nov-
elty, nuance, and clarity to the broad landscape of multilingual
prosodic research through a language-generalizable approach
to studying spontaneous CSW. From a higher level of abstrac-
tion than any individual prosodic feature, we investigate and
interpret how the prosody of code-switched Spanish-English in
BM differs from monolingual speech in both languages. This
reinforces and scales up prior claims of fine-grained prosodic
distinctions between CSW and monolingual speech. We then
demonstrate that this difference interacts with and can be ex-
plained to varying degrees by speaker proficiency and linguistic
characteristics specific to multilingual speech. Further, the vari-
ation we find is salient enough to be learned by unsupervised
and end-to-end predictive LID models; the latter have been par-
ticularly underutilized as diagnostic tools in prosody research,
but our application of them demonstrates their largely untapped
value in enabling quantitative interpretation of latent variation.
We conclude that spontaneous Spanish-English CSW is
prosodically unique, with slightly greater similarity to mono-
lingual Spanish than English in this corpus. The qualitative
patterns of CSW prosody that we uncover not only offer a
high-level perspective misse