Listeners’ gendered experiences and beliefs affect iconic pitch associations
Sasha Calhoun ID ∗∗, Paul Warren ID , Sara Gilbert ID
Te Herenga Waka - Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
Sasha.Calhoun@vuw.ac.nz, Paul.Warren@vuw.ac.nz, Sara.Gilbert@vuw.ac.nz
Abstract
Certain intonational meanings have long been claimed to be
iconic. For example, high vs. low voice pitch is physically
linked to small vs. large body size, leading to affective mean-
ings like submissiveness vs. dominance. While such associ-
ations have a physical basis, we claim they are also socially
constructed, affected by language- and individual-specific ide-
ological links, e.g. between dominance and masculinity. We
present an experiment pairing a priming task and an Implicit
Association Task (IAT) to probe variation in the strength of the
pitch∼size association. Primes were either strengthening or in-
hibiting and highlighted the affective link between size and sub-
missiveness/dominance. The priming affected the strength of
the pitch∼size association as expected; however, the size of the
effect differed by the gender of the listener and voice. These
findings contribute to our understanding of how iconic mean-
ings develop in speech and the crucial role of social experience
and beliefs.
Index Terms: sound symbolism, sociophonetics, gender and
language, prosody, speech processing
1. Introduction
There are long-standing claims that an important source of in-
tonational meaning is sound symbolism, or iconicity [1, 2, 3].
For example, the Frequency Code links high and low pitch
with body size and sex, based on animal behaviour, and in turn
affective meanings such as submissiveness versus dominance
[1, 2]. However, while Frequency Code associations have a
basis in common bodily experience, we contend they are also,
like all of language, social. That is, we claim such pitch as-
sociations are also socially constructed, shaped by language-
and individual-specific experiences and beliefs, such as gen-
der stereotypes linking masculinity and dominance, which in-
fluence intonational meanings [4, 5, 6, 7]. We present an exper-
iment using a priming task followed by an Implicit Association
Task (IAT) [8, 9], to probe how individual experiences affect
the strength of the voice pitch∼size association and how this
varies by gender. This study contributes to burgeoning research
showing the pervasive role of iconicity in shaping language pro-
cessing [10, 11, 12, 13], and helps us to understand how iconic
associations can both have a physical basis and be shaped by
individuals’ linguistic and social experience.
The most well-known and well-studied iconic association
of pitch is the Frequency Code [2, 14], linking pitch with in-
dividual size and gender. Humans, and other animals, with
smaller vocal folds produce on average vocalisations with
higher pitch, and larger with lower [15]. In humans, high/low
**indicates the corresponding author.
pitch, and its primary acoustic correlate fundamental frequency
(F0), is also linked to sex, via sexual dimorphism after pu-
berty [16], and therefore, to the presentation of binary gender
[17]. Crucially, [15] observed mammals and birds tended to use
lower pitch when acting dominantly or aggressively and higher
pitch when acting submissively, regardless of their actual size,
i.e. pitch conveyed apparent size. Following from this, [1, p.
327] claimed that the Frequency Code underlies affective mean-
ings in human language, e.g. “deference, politeness, submis-
sion, lack of confidence, are signaled by high and/or rising F0
whereas assertiveness, authority, aggression, confidence, threat
are conveyed by low/or falling F0”. Consistent with this, studies
have shown that humans strongly associate F0 with body size
and binary gender, in both production and perception, consistent
with the Frequency Code [17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. High pitch has
been shown to be associated with submissiveness, uncertainty,
weakness and dependency, and low pitch with their opposites,
for listeners across gender, culture and language backgrounds
[2, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26].
However, although these cross-linguistic similarities have a
physical basis, the Frequency Code is also based on culturally-
specific ideological links, e.g. between submissiveness and
femininity, and dominance and masculinity, which have largely
not been accounted for in prior research. There is abundant evi-
dence from sociolinguistic and sociophonetic research that links
between linguistic features and particular groups and affects are
socially constructed (e.g. [4, 27]). It is therefore more appro-
priate to see iconic associations as “products of cultural con-
structions of resemblance to things in the natural world” [27,
p. 754]. That is, among the multiple potential resemblances
pitch (and other linguistic features) could have, those that align
with existing listener ‘world views’ and the affordances of the
context are most likely to become established social meanings
[4, 5, 6, 7, 27].
In our recent studies, using the IAT, we have shown that En-
glish listeners implictly associate high versus low F0 with small
versus large body size and female versus male gender, consis-
tent with the Frequency Code [7, 28]. However, the strength
of these associations differs depending on social factors. [7]
looked at the association of voice pitch (in nonsense words)
with each of size and gender. We found that implicit associa-
tions of pitch were stronger for the gender than for the size con-
cepts. For both concepts, associations were stronger for male
than female listeners, particularly older men. For the gender
concept, associations were stronger for male voices than fe-
male. We argued that these findings arise because ideologies
related to the Frequency Code (linking large size, strength, and
dominance) tend to be stronger for men, reflecting gender-based
stereotypes (see also [4, 5, 6, 29, 30]). [28] looked at the asso-
ciation of rising pitch (uptalk) versus falling (on short phrases
7383
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1642
likeyou know) with size and gender. We found uptalk was ro-
bustly implicitly associated with gender and more weakly with
body size, with both concepts being stronger for female listen-
ers. Male listeners showed stronger associations with female
voices, and female listeners vice versa. We argued these differ-
ing gender associations reflect the stereotyped, and stigmatised,
association of uptalk with women (see [31]), interacting with
affective associations of the Frequency Code.
The effects of gender in these studies, however, were only
shown at the level of group gender identity, rather than looking
at individual experiences and beliefs directly. In this study, we
used a priming task, aiming to temporarily alter participants’ ex-
periences of the pitch∼size implicit association, before they did
the IAT task (similar to [9, 32]). We aim to show firstly that this
iconic pitch association, with a physical basis, is malleable and
secondly, that the strength of the effect of the prime manipula-
tion differs based on social factors, primarily gender. In particu-
lar, the primes used highlight the affective associations claimed
in the Frequency Code, i.e. high∼small∼weak/submissive,
low∼large∼strong/dominant. In this way, we aim to see
how triggering this ideological link, along with the physical
pitch∼size association, affects the strength of that association
for listeners and voices of different genders.
2. The Present Study
The present study investigates whether the implicit association
between size and voice pitch can be strengthened or inhibited
by a priming task. In the priming task, participants meet fic-
tional creatures whose physical size and voice pitch are either
convergent or divergent from the expected assocation. In addi-
tion, to communicate affective associations related to size, the
content of the creatures’ high-pitch utterances conveyed weak-
ness or uncertainty and that of the low-pitch utterances con-
veyed strength or authority. Whether the priming task affects
participants’ implicit associations is measured in the size IAT
from [7].
3. Method
3.1. Participants
In all, 163 participants (aged 18-65) completed the study. Five
were excluded: one did not have the required language back-
ground (L1 speaker of British, Australian or NZ English); three
had more than 10% missing data or lower than 75% response
accuracy in test blocks; one scored below chance in a memory
test following the priming block (see below). The remaining
158 participants were 80 female and 78 male, with 8-11 in each
of 16 conditions described below.
3.2. Design and Procedure
The experiment consisted of a priming task plus memory task,
followed by an IAT (see Table 1). The priming task consisted of
a sequence of presentations of 10 pairs of pictures of one large
and one small fictional creature, each linked (by the appearance
of an empty speech bubble next to the creature) with a spoken
statement that was either low-pitched and strong/authoritative
or high-pitched and weak/uncertain. The priming block was
either convergent (large creatures had low pitch and small crea-
tures had high pitch) or divergent (creature size and statements
were reversed). The voices were either all female or all male.
Participants were assigned to one of four priming conditions,
with voice gender crossed with convergence.
Priming Task
Convergent Divergent
Pairs of Large creatures with Pairs of Large creatures with
Low pitch / Strong statements High pitch / Weak statements
and Small creatures with and Small creatures with
High pitch / Weak statements Low pitch / Strong statements
Memory Task
Pairs of similar creatures Pairs of similar creatures
(priming + foil) (priming + foil)
IA T
Block Type Stimuli assigned to
Left key Right key
1 Familiarisation Large Animal Small Animal
2 Familiarisation Low Pitch High Pitch
3 Consistent Large Animal +
Low Pitch
Small Animal +
High Pitch
4 Familiarisation Small Animal Large Animal
5 Inconsistent Small Animal +
Low Pitch
Large Animal +
High Pitch
Table 1:Overview of experiment tasks. The IAT block order
here is for the consistent-first condition.
To motivate the priming block, participants were told that
they would meet creatures from a strange island who were in
danger, and only those they remembered would be saved. Ac-
cordingly, the priming block was followed by a short memory
test in which participants saw 10 pairs of similar creatures (one
from the priming task and one foil) and had to identify which
had appeared in the priming task (see Table 1). Both priming
and memory tasks were adminstered in Qualtrics [33].
After the memory test, participants completed an IAT, ad-
ministered in PsyToolkit [34, 35]. In the IAT, participants had to
classify pictures of animals as large or small and recordings of
nonsense words as high or low in pitch. The voices were either
female or male. The IAT consisted of five blocks, as listed in
Table 1. Familiarisation blocks gave participants practice with
responding to stimuli with particular sizes or pitches with one
of two keyboard keys (‘E’ and ‘I’). The important blocks for
the IAT are blocks 3 and 5 in which participants use these same
keys to respond to sequences of stimuli which are either animal
pictures or spoken nonsense words. In the consistent block, one
key is used for large animals and low-pitched voices and the
other for small animals and high-pitched voices. In the incon-
sistent block, one key is used for small animals and low-pitched
voices and the other for large animals and high-pitched voices.
The order of consistent and inconsistent blocks (consis-
tency order) was switched between participants. For half of
the participants (‘consistent-first’), the order was as in Table
1 with the consistent before inconsistent. For the other half
(‘inconsistent-first’), blocks 1 and 3 were swapped with blocks
4 and 5. V oice gender was matched between the priming and
IAT tasks. That is, if participants had heard female voices in the
priming task then they also heard female voices in the IAT. Par-
ticipant gender was also balanced across conditions. There were
consequently 16 groups of participants defined by the crossing
of participant gender, voice gender, convergence in the priming
task and consistency order in the IAT.
3.3. Materials
3.3.1. Priming stimuli
Pictures and voices for the priming task were AI-generated,
using ImagineArt (https://www.imagine.art/) and
SpeechGen (https://speechgen.io/), respectively. The
7384
creatures were generated using prompts for “imaginary forest
creature/alien”, plus other details to generate different charac-
ters in various colours.
The voice stimuli were either weak/uncertain statements
with high pitch (“I’m a bit scared as I’m a bit of a weakling,
I hope you can help me”) or strong/authoritative statements
with low pitch (“Things might be a bit different here, but I’m
strong and can take it”). These statements were generated with
the assistance of Microsoft Co-Pilot (https://copilot.
microsoft.com/). V oices were selected from the Speech-
Gen database with baseline pitch in an approximately 3 semi-
tone (ST) range for each gender (male: 105-139Hz and female:
200-238Hz). Each voice was then resynthesised using an SSML
function in SpeechGen to create a low and high pitch version.
The low versions were created by shifting the pitch by -3ST,
and the high by +4ST. These values were decided to create a
clear perceptual difference between low and high, while trying
to keep the voices relatively natural sounding.
The final set of 10 large and 10 small creatures, 10 weak and
10 strong statements and 10 pairs of low/high voices for each
of male and female gender were decided following a norming
study (N=40).
3.3.2. Memory test stimuli
The memory test stimuli consisted of the pictures used in the
priming, each combined with a picture, not seen before, of a
creature the same size and colour as the target picture. Each
picture pair was accompanied by the audio recording that had
been played with the target picture.
3.3.3. IAT stimuli
The IAT stimuli were from [7]. The stimuli for the size con-
cept consisted of twelve black-and-white photo images, against
a plain white background. Six were of large animals (bear,
camel, crocodile, elephant, giraffe, panda) and six of small ani-
mals (blackbird, frog, guinea-pig, mouse, rabbit, squirrel). The
images were taken from the Animal Images database [36], and
the two sets were matched for familiarity and valence. The at-
tribute stimuli were recordings of three females and three males,
each producing two nonsense stimuli (yerwerandernerm). Us-
ing scripts in Praat [37] and MATLAB [38], each stimulus was
time- and pitch-normalised (195Hz for females and 110Hz for
males). A 0.7 ERB declination was imposed on each, and the
entire stimulus then raised by 1.7 ERB to create the high pitch
stimuli and lowered by 0.7 ERB to create the low pitch stimuli.
3.4. Analysis
Traditionally, IAT data are analysed via a difference measure
using normalised mean response times (RTs) in consistent and
inconsistent IAT blocks. Following [7], rather than reducing
raw RTs to means and analysing these means, we analysed cor-
rect responses using mixed-effects linear regression modelling
in R [39], focusing on factors that influence RT differences be-
tween consistent and inconsistent blocks. This modelling also
allows us to include random intercepts for participants, miti-
gating the effects of overall differences in individuals’ response
speeds.
Because of their heavily right-skewed distribution, RTs
were normalised prior to analysis. A series of normalisation
procedures were explored, and the best fit to a normal distribu-
tion resulted from the inverse square-root transformation, which
was scaled by 1000 to avoid very small numbers in analysis
Figure 1:Model estimates of the effect of Consistency, Voice
Gender and Prime on Response Time (RT). Bottom panel shows
RT. Top panel shows the effect size for the difference between
consistent and inconsistent blocks (0 is no significant effect).
tables. The transformed RTs were the dependent variable in
the analysis. The buildmer package [40] was used to deter-
mine the best-fit model, starting with a fixed effect design that
included the three-way interaction of Consistency (responses
in consistent vs. inconsistent IAT blocks) with Order (consis-
tent block before or after inconsistent) and Prime (convergent
vs. divergent priming); the four-way interaction of Consistency,
Prime, V oice Gender and Gender (of Participants); the two-
way interaction of Stimulus Type (concept vs. attribute stim-
uli) and Age (of Participants, scaled); and all lower-level effects
included within these interactions. The random effects struc-
ture included by-Participant and by-Stimulus intercepts, and by-
Stimulus slopes for Consistency. The effect of the predictors
was assessed through interactions with Consistency, i.e. based
on the effect size of Consistency at each level of the interaction.
4. Results
The final model returned by buildmer is given in (1). This model
was subject to model comparison using anova() from the car li-
brary [41]. Post-hoc analyses of the results were conducted us-
ing emmeans [42]. For results involving Consistency, the effect
size for consistency was measured using eff size in emmeans.
1. Response Time∼Type*Age + Consistency*Gender + Con-
sistency*Order*Prime + Consistency*V oiceGender*Prime +
(1|Participant) + (1|Stimulus)
The significant three-way interaction of Consistency, V oice
Gender and Prime (F[1,14312] = 4.17, p <0.05) is shown
in Figure 1. The consistency effect is present for all combi-
nations of Priming and V oice Gender. For both voice genders
the consistency effect is stronger with convergent priming, and
numerically this difference is larger for female voices (the con-
fidence intervals for the effect sizes for female voices do not
overlap, while they do for male voices). There was a significant
interaction of Consistency and Prime (F[1,14312] = 14.5, p <
0.001), showing there is a significant consistency effect in both
prime conditions, although this is numerically stronger with
convergent priming.
Figure 2 shows the significant interaction of Consistency
and Participant Gender (F[1,14313] = 27.36, p <0.001.)
The consistency effect is stronger for female participants than
7385
Figure 2:Model estimates of the effect of Consistency and Par-
ticipant Gender on Response Time (RT).
for male participants (based on non-overlap of the confidence
intervals), but strongly significant for both.
There was a significant three-way interaction of Consis-
tency, Order and Prime (F[1,14312] = 23.79, p <0.001).
Post-hoc analyses show that the consistency effect is positive for
convergent priming for both consistency orders and for diver-
gent priming when the consistent block precedes the inconsis-
tent block. It is negative (and significant) when divergent prim-
ing is coupled with inconsistent-first order. A significant inter-
action of Consistency and Prime (F[1,14312] = 14.50, p <
0.001) arose because, although the consistency effect is signif-
icant after both priming conditions, it is stronger after conver-
gent priming. Post-hoc analysis of a significant interaction of
Consistency with Order (F[1,14312] = 261.17, p <0.001)
shows that the consistency effect is significant when the consis-
tent block precedes the inconsistent block but not vice versa.
There was a significant two-way interaction of Type and
Age (F[1,14329] = 24.63, p <0.001): while the effect of
participant age on response times is significant for both target
types, it is stronger for the pictures. Finally, there were sig-
nificant simple effects for Age (older participants are slower),
Consistency (responses in consistent blocks are faster) and Type
(responses to pictures are faster than those to pitch stimuli).
5. Discussion and Conclusion
This study used a combination of priming task and IAT to probe
factors affecting the strength of the iconic association between
voice pitch and body size, as per the Frequency Code. In the
priming task, participants experienced imaginary creatures who
either converged or diverged with expected associations of size,
pitch and weak/strong affect. They then did an IAT to mea-
sure the strength of their implicit voice pitch∼body size associ-
ation. The results showed that the priming task affected the im-
plicit association as predicted, with a stronger association in the
convergent condition and a weaker though still significant as-
sociation in the divergent condition. This is consistent with the
strength of iconic pitch associations being malleable based on
listeners’ experiences and beliefs. It was further found that the
effect of the priming task was stronger with female voices than
male voices, with the prime conditions not robustly different for
male voices; although the implicit association was significant
for both genders and prime conditions. The size∼pitch associa-
tion was stronger for female listeners than male, although robust
for both. This did not interact with prime condition. We there-
fore see that the strength of the iconic association differs based
on the gender of the listener and the voice they are listening to,
and this is affected by the priming experience (at least for voice
gender), in line with our claim that iconic associations differ
based on individual experiences and beliefs related to gender.
The effectiveness of the priming task showed that the
strength of iconic pitch association can be (temporarily)
changed based on a listener’s experiences related to that as-
sociation. Further, the priming task specifically highlighted
the association between size and affect (weak-uncertain/strong-
authoritative), which is reinforced by gender stereotypes. This
is consistent with a listener’s ideological beliefs and not just
their experience of a particular physical resemblance, affect-
ing the strength of iconic associations in speech. It should be
noted, though, as the prime stimuli also manipulated voice pitch
(through resynthesised high and low pitch versions), we cannot
separate whether it was the pitch, affect or both which triggered
the priming. In a future study, we plan to use unmanipulated
voices to tease this out.
For the effect of voice gender, there was an interaction with
prime condition, such that the effect was strongest for female
voices in the convergent condition, weakest for female voices in
the divergent condition, with male voices in between, showing
a smaller effect of the priming for male voices. We argue that
this was because the priming task highlighted gendered affec-
tive associations, so pitch∼size∼affect associations were more
strongly reinforced or disrupted for female voices than male.
This overrode any tendency for the voice gender effect to be
stronger for male voices based on the physical size∼pitch asso-
ciation itself; such as was found in [7] for the gender concept
(voice gender was not significant for the size concept in that
study). This is along the same lines as the ‘opposite gender’ ef-
fect of listener and voice gender for uptalk in [28], in that gen-
dered beliefs about other voices changed the strength of iconic
associations.
In terms of listener gender, the effect size for the size∼pitch
association for male listeners was similar to the findings in [7].
However, in this study, female listeners showed a stronger con-
sistency effect than male, whereas in [7] the size∼pitch asso-
ciation for female listeners was marginal. As there was no in-
teraction with prime condition, this difference appears to stem
from the experience of doing the priming task per se, whether
in the convergent or divergent condition. The direction of the
listener gender effect is in line with [28], where we found asso-
ciations with size were stron