An Acoustic Landmark Database of the English Lexicon
via Articulatory Synthesis
Mateo C´amara1,2,∗∗, Jos´e Luis Blanco1, Juan Ignacio Godino-Llorente3, Jeung-Yoon Choi2, Stefanie
Shattuck-Hufnagel2
1 Signal Processing Applications Group, Information Processing & Telecomm. Center, Universidad
Polit´ecnica de Madrid, Spain
2 Speech Communication Group, Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, USA
3 Bioengineering and Optoelectronics Lab., Universidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid, Spain
mateo.camara@upm.es, jl.blanco@upm.es, ignacio.godino@upm.es, jyechoi@mit.edu,
sshuf@mit.edu
Abstract
Acoustic landmark theory treats speech as organized around
the acoustic consequences of articulatory gestures that shape
the vocal tract and airflow. Progress is limited by the scarcity
of large, unambiguously annotated landmark datasets. We in-
vert the problem by generating speech from landmark pat-
terns. Using the Pink Trombone physical vocal-tract synthe-
sizer, we produce an English lexicon for two adult configu-
rations (male, female). With direct control of gestures, we
place landmark labels algorithmically at the exact times of their
physical events (e.g., oral closures/releases). The corpus con-
tains>200,000 synthesized words, rendered for both configura-
tions with time-aligned annotations; intelligibility is measured
with STOI. We leverage it for statistics across the lexicon from
an articulatory-event view, reporting landmark frequencies and
dominant cue patterns, and enabling quantitative studies plus
training/benchmarking of automatic landmark detectors.
Index Terms: Acoustic landmarks, speech synthesis, articula-
tory synthesis, acoustic phonetics, Pink Trombone, computa-
tional phonetics.
1. Introduction
The prevailing paradigm in Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) processes the speech signal using uniform, frame-based
analysis. However, insights from human speech perception sug-
gest a more event-driven approach [1]. The Acoustic Land-
mark Theory, a foundational contribution to acoustic phonetics
proposed by Kenneth Stevens, holds that speech is organized
around discrete, perceptually salient events corresponding to
critical articulatory gestures [2, 3]. These acoustic landmarks
(such as the abrupt increase in spectral energy happening when
the release of a stop consonant or the sonority peak of a vowel)
serve as anchors for decoding the phonetic content of an utter-
ance.
The event-based perspective suggested by the Landmark
approach has substantial applications. Research has shown that
speech frames containing landmarks are significantly more in-
formative for ASR tasks than surrounding frames. Also, lever-
aging landmarks can improve accuracy, especially under chal-
lenging conditions [4, 5]. Beyond ASR, landmark analysis has
become a powerful tool in clinical phonetics. They provide ob-
jective metrics to assess speech disorders [6, 7]. For example,
**indicates the corresponding author.
the SpeechMark toolkit demonstrated that patterns of landmark
expression can quantify the impact of voice pathologies on in-
telligibility [8].
Despite its broad utility, progress in landmark-based re-
search has been persistently hampered by a fundamental chal-
lenge: the scarcity of large-scale, accurately annotated corpora.
Manual annotation is prohibitively labor-intensive and subject
to inter-annotator variability [9]. Although recent efforts like
the Auto-Landmark project have made a significant contribu-
tion by releasing a landmark-annotated version of the TIMIT
corpus, those annotations entirely rely on their automatic anno-
tator. The accuracy of these automatic annotations has not yet
been independently validated [10]. Landmark annotation, even
when carefully addressed, has to deal with the fact that coar-
ticulatory and reduction processes are pervasive in continuous
speech. That is, in connected speech, the acoustic realization of
landmarks may be modified, weakened, or entirely omitted due
to articulatory overlap between adjacent segments, where the
gestures for neighboring sounds temporally overlap and inter-
act. This means that the “expected” acoustic events predicted
by the underlying phonological sequence may not always be
clearly identifiable in the signal, further complicating the task
of establishing reliable ground-truth annotations from natural
speech data.
This paper addresses this gap by proposing a different
approach. Instead of analyzing real speech, we generate a
landmark-generated speech corpus from first principles using
a physically-based model. We employ the Pink Trombone1 [11]
(PT), a vocal tract synthesizer, to systematically generate the
entire English lexicon. 2 Because we directly control the syn-
thesizer’s articulatory parameters (e.g., tongue position, lip clo-
sure, velic opening), we can algorithmically place landmark la-
bels with temporal precision, at the exact moments of the un-
derlying articulatory events. In this generative framework, the
landmarks emerge directly from the articulatory commands that
produce the speech signal, rather than being inferred post-hoc
from the acoustics.
This single-word-sized dataset provides a sandbox environ-
ment, free from human labeling error. It is meant to validate
the acoustic consequences of landmark theory and to serve as
a ground-truth for training and benchmarking future automatic
landmark detection systems.
1https://dood.al/pinktrombone/
2http://people.umass.edu/nconstan/CMU-IPA/
6280
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1374
The remainder of the paper is as follows: Section 2 defines
a theoretical background, Section 3 delineates the methodology
for creating the database, Section 4 shows the landmark-based
statistical results of the English lexicon, Section 5 discusses the
results, and Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. Background
2.1. The Physical Grounding of Landmark Theory
Acoustic Landmark Theory motivates a model of the first steps
in the process by which a listener decodes the continuously-
varying speech signal into a sequence of discrete, meaningful
linguistic units. To grasp the theory, it is essential to understand
the relationship between a number of different aspects of the
speech production-perception processes [12].
•Distinctive Featuresare the abstract, binary properties that
define phonemes in the mental lexicon (e.g., ‘[+nasal]’, ‘[-
continuant]’). They represent the intended linguistic con-
trasts.
•Articulatory Gesturesare the physical actions of the vocal
tract components (tongue, lips, velum) that manifest these
features. For example, the feature ‘[-continuant]’ is realized
by a gesture of complete closure at some point in the oral
tract.
•Acoustic Eventsare the direct, physical consequences of
these gestures on the sound wave. A complete closure gesture
yields in an abrupt drop in acoustic energy, while its release
produces a sudden burst of broadband noise. The gesture of
maximizing the oral cavity for a vowel results in a peak of
sonorant energy in the signal.
•Acoustic Landmarksare the labels applied to these highly
salient acoustic events. A landmark is therefore not an imag-
inary construct. It is a concrete aspect of the speech signal,
with its location in time and its type determined by a mea-
surable physical reality in the signal. A landmark time stamp
marks a tangible event in the speech signal that indicates a
critical moment in the sequence of continuous articulatory
movements [3].
The connection is explicit and direct. For example, a V owel
landmark (<V>) is placed at the point of maximal energy of
a vowel. A Stop Closure landmark (<Sc>) is placed at the
moment of abrupt energy drop corresponding to oral closure.
Similar definitions can be found for all Landmark types. Thus,
the landmark is a theoretical anchor with its location determined
by a measurable physical reality in the signal (and in the tract
configuration).
2.2. Classical Landmark Annotation
Before the prevalence of end-to-end deep learning, the detection
of acoustic landmarks was approached from a signal process-
ing perspective rooted in expert phonetic knowledge [13]. This
classical methodology forms the basis for human annotation
and validation, involving the identification of specific and ob-
servable patterns in the speech spectrogram that serve as reliable
evidence for the underlying articulatory events and intended
features. Our work relies on this connection for its validation:
the landmarks we generate algorithmically correspond to events
that are verifiable through these classical acoustic cues.
While the specific set and definitions of landmarks have
evolved since the theory’s inception, this work adopts an
updated approach that categorizes them into eight primary
types: four pairs of consonantal events, alongside vowel
and glide landmarks [14]. This classification refines earlier
event-based notations [8] (such as simple voicing onsets like
<+g>/<−g>) into a more detailed, articulatorily-grounded
framework [15]. Table 1 details these types, including their
physical articulatory cause and the corresponding acoustic evi-
dence that a human annotator or a rule-based algorithm would
search for in a spectrogram.
This evidence-based approach is how the landmark anno-
tations in our generated data can be validated. Our interactive
visualization tool makes this link transparent by simultaneously
displaying the spectrogram (the “evidence”) and a real-time an-
imation of the vocal tract model (the “physical cause”). This
provides an intuitive and direct confirmation of the foundational
relationship between articulation and acoustics.
2.3. The Pink Trombone: a Controllable Physical Model
The central tenet of our work requires a synthesizer that allows
us to control theorigin(articulation) and generate themanifes-
tation(acoustic signal). For this purpose, we selected the PT
[11], an open-source physical model of a human vocal tract,
powered by mathematical formulations of the underlying pro-
cesses. It excels in providing an intuitive yet powerful inter-
face for manipulating low-level speech production mechanisms,
which results in an initial landmark-based synthesis which re-
flects the acoustic patterns of the underlying Consonant-V owel
structure of an utterance.
The synthesizer models the vocal tract as a waveguide and
provides direct control over its primary articulatory compo-
nents. A detailed technical description of the model, including
its parameters and modifications for gender diversity, is pro-
vided in [16]. The controllable elements include:
•The Glottal Source:Controls the fundamental frequency
(f0) and degree of voicing, simulating the vibration of the
vocal folds.
•The Tongue Body:A two-parameter system controls the po-
sition and diameter of the tongue, defining the primary shape
of the oral cavity and the location of major constrictions.
•Oral Constrictions:Additional parameters allow for ex-
plicit constrictions at locations corresponding to the lips and
the soft palate, crucial for producing stops and fricatives.
•The Velopharyngeal Port (Nasal Cavity):A binary control
allows the port to be opened or closed, enabling the produc-
tion of nasal sounds by coupling the nasal cavity to the vocal
tract.
Although more anatomically informed and complex syn-
thesizers exist, such as the Maeda model [17] or V ocalTract-
Lab (VTL) [18], which offer higher physiological fidelity at the
cost of increased computational complexity, the PT was delib-
erately chosen. As discussed in [16], its primary advantages for
research in articulatory analysis and synthesis are its computa-
tional efficiency and simplicity –particularly after the modifi-
cations that were introduced to accelerate the synthesis process
[16]– as well as the ease of interpreting its results, and its highly
intuitive Graphical User Interface (GUI).
3. Methodology
Our process for generating the landmark-annotated database
follows four main stages, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
6281
Table 1:Landmark Types with their Articulatory Causes and Classical Acoustic Cues.
Landmark Articulatory Event (Physical Cause) Acoustic Cue (Evidence in Spectrogram)
V Maximal vocal tract opening for a vowel nucleus. Peak in low-frequency sonorant energy. Strong and clear formant structure.
G Narrowing of the vocal tract without creating turbu-
lence.
Minimum in sonorant energy between two vocalic peaks, with smooth formant
transitions.
Sc Complete blockage of oral airflow by an articulator. Abrupt cessation of energy, creating a “stop gap” or silence in the spectrogram.
Sr Sudden release of built-up air pressure from a stop clo-
sure. A sharp spike of broadband energy (burst transient) following a stop gap.
Fc Formation of a narrow constriction causing turbulent
airflow. Onset of sustained, high-frequency aperiodic noise.
Fr Widening of the constriction, ceasing the turbulent air-
flow. Offset of the frication noise.
Nc Oral closure combined with an open velopharyngeal
port. Abrupt damping of upper formants and onset of a low-frequency nasal murmur.
Nr Release of the oral closure, redirecting airflow orally. Abrupt transition from nasal murmur to a vowel-like formant structure.
Figure 1:The data generation pipeline, from lexical entry to the
final landmark-specified waveform.
3.1. Linguistic Corpus and Phonological Transcription
The foundation of our work is a comprehensive English lexi-
con derived from the Carnegie Mellon University Pronouncing
Dictionary (CMUDict) [19]. The dictionary’s original ARPA-
BET transcriptions of individual words were converted to their
canonical representations in the International Phonetic Alpha-
bet (IPA) [20], resulting in a master list of words and their corre-
sponding allophone sequences. (Although these sequences are
described as phonemes in the database description, they are bet-
ter characterized as phones, since they specify context-specific
forms of the underlying context-invariant phonemes.) This ap-
proach is grounded in prior work demonstrating that acoustic
landmarks are robust and consistently (although not invariably)
realized in American English [21]. This suggest that bilingual
corpora can be used on the assumption that landmark cues,
which are tightly tied to the articulatory configuration that pro-
duce them, will not differ significantly in different languages.
Preliminary results for Korean [22] and Italian [23] provide sup-
port for this assumption.
3.2. Phoneme-to-Articulatory Mapping
A crucial step was to define a mapping from each IPA
phone to a static, canonical configuration of the PT’s artic-
ulatory parameters. We mapped each English phoneme to
targets in the synthesizer’s control space (e.g., tongue-body
height/advancement, tongue-tip position, lip rounding, jaw
opening, velum, and glottal state), assembled manually from
standard acoustic/articulatory descriptions and IPA sources [2,
17, 18, 20]. V owel targets follow the cardinal-vowel geome-
try. We then nudged parameters to place tokens within expected
adultF 1–F2 regions (±100 Hz). Diphthongs are implemented
as linear trajectories between the two vowel targets with brief
steady states at the endpoints (≈80–120 ms). For obstruents, we
set the place and degree of constriction, voicing, and velopha-
ryngeal state. Stops use a closure–burst template, fricatives use
a narrow constriction to elicit turbulence, and nasals lower the
velum at the canonical place. Liquids and glides use less ex-
treme constrictions at the standard places (e.g., alveolar lateral
for /l/, postalveolar rhotic for /ô/). Targets correspond to canon-
ical forms as if spoken alone, not conditioned by phrase-level
factors such as adjacent words and variable prosodic structure.
In these word-sized sequences, we approximate a limited set
of coarticulatory effects, such as changes in amplitude during
movement toward closures and after releases, via linear inter-
polation of articulatory parameters. Two authors cross-checked
all entries and made small adjustments, guided by listening and
visual inspection of the spectrogram. The final phone-target
lookup and timing templates are released with the dataset card.
3.3. Speech Synthesis and Coarticulation
With the target configurations defined, word-level synthesis was
automated. For a given phone sequence (e.g., [k] [æ] [t] for
“cat”), the system retrieves the corresponding articulatory target
vectors. To model coarticulation and create a smooth utterance,
we used linear interpolation between the parameter vectors of
adjacent phones. This approach has previously been validated
[24].
Phone duration was kept constant across all instances to
create our controlled, aprosodic database. This deliberate
choice removes prosodic variability, allowing the dataset to
serve as a clean baseline for studying segmental acoustic phe-
nomena, regardless of the number of phones in each word (i.e.,
the duration of a phone does not vary with the number of phones
in the word, as is the case in human-produced speech [25]). In
this spirit, thef 0 was also kept constant, and voicing was en-
abled for all sonorant segments. The entire process ran on a
server, systematically generating a W A V file for each word in
the dictionary, coding each sample with 16 bits and producing
48,000 samples per second of audio. For each phone sequence
(word), we synthesize two tokens, one using the adult-male con-
figuration and one using the adult-female configuration of the
Pink Trombone. The segmental articulatory targets are identical
across both generated forms, and only the sex-specific anatomi-
cal parameters differ. This yields a parallel lexicon where every
word is available for both speaker sexes.
3.4. Algorithmic Landmark Placement
In this context, the generation of annotations is a deterministic
process that maps a word’s phonetic specification to a precise
sequence of landmark events. This procedure relies on a pre-
6282
defined set of rules that dictate the temporal placement of land-
marks relative to the fixed duration assigned to each phoneme
in a sequence. This rule-based approach ensures perfect con-
sistency across the entire database. The same rule-based sched-
ule is applied identically to both the male and female config-
urations, so that landmark labels are fully comparable across
speaker sex.
The specific placement rules are defined based on the
phoneme’s manner of articulation:
•For Vowels and Glides:These sonorant events are charac-
terized by a relatively stable, open vocal tract configuration.
The landmark (<V>for vowels,<G>for glides) is placed
at the temporal midpoint of this stable articulatory posture.
Because the movement of the articulators for vowels and
glides is continuous rather than abrupt, this midpoint is an
approximation: the<V>landmark targets the point of max-
imal vocal tract opening, and the<G>landmark targets the
point of maximal constriction. Thus this instant corresponds
to an estimation of the point of maximal vocal tract opening
for vowels, resulting in a peak of acoustic energy, and the
point of maximal constriction for glides, resulting in an en-
ergy minimum between two peaks. Liquids (e.g., /l/, /r/) are
likewise represented as glide-like constriction events (<G>),
while their phone identity is preserved in the metadata.
•For Nasals:These consonants require a specific articula-
tory configuration: a complete oral closure combined with
an open velopharyngeal port. These landmarks are placed at
the boundaries of this event. The Nasal Closure (<Nc>) is
placed at the exact moment that the synthesizer’s oral tract
closes while the nasal passage parameter is active, and the
Nasal Release (<Nr>) is placed at the moment the oral clo-
sure is released and the nasal passage inactive.
•For Fricatives:The acoustic signature of a fricative is gen-
erated by a specific noise source within the PT when an ar-
ticulator is narrowing the vocal tract. The Fricative Closure
(<Fc>) landmark is placed at the precise time sample of this
noise source’s activation, and the Fricative Release (<Fr>)
is placed at the exact moment of its deactivation.
•For Stop Consonants:The Stop Closure (<Sc>) landmark
is placed at the moment the vocal tract is completely ob-
structed. The Stop Release (<Sr>), representing the instan-
taneous burst, is placed at the moment the vocal tract opens
enough to permit air flow.
This programmatic approach ensures that the annotations
are not inferred from the acoustic output but are, by definition,
predictable from the underlying articulatory schedule. The pro-
cess yields a dataset with high-precision deterministic ground
truth labels for each synthesized word, establishing an unam-
biguous reference for future research.
4. Results: Database and Visualization Tool
4.1. The ALLIE-PT Database
The result of this process is the “Articulatory Landmark Lexi-
con of English - Pink Trombone” (ALLIE-PT) database. It is
publicly available online3. It contains over 200,000 W A V files,
representing a vast portion of the English lexicon. The audio
format is 48 kHz, 16-bit PCM mono W A V . A corresponding
JSON file for each audio file with sample-level landmark times-
tamps and articulatory labels.
3https://huggingface.co/datasets/mcamara/
all-words-in-english-with-pink-trombone
Each entry is indexed by a word id (alphabetical order)
and contains: (i) the corresponding audio waveform, (ii) an
utterance JSON with the Pink Trombone keyframes (phone
labels, timing in seconds, and control parameters such as
tongue.index/diameter, frontConstriction.index/diameter, back-
Constriction.diameter, tenseness, loudness, tract length,f 0),
and (iii) a landmarks JSON listing time-stamped acoustic
events. Landmark types follow the updated versions of [3]
framework (e.g., Sc/Sr for stop closure/release, Fc/Fr for frica-
tives...). In the Hugging Face release, utterance and landmarks
are stored as JSON-formatted strings alongside the audio object.
Helper code is provided to parse them. More details on how to
use the dataset can be found in the dataset card associated to the
repository.
4.2. Landmark Distribution and Lexical Statistics
We compiled a summary of the overall database statistics. Ta-
ble 2 provides an overview of the corpus scale and the relative
prevalence of consonantal versus vocalic/glide events.
Table 2:Overall statistics of the generated landmark database
(one sex).
Statistic Value
Total Words Processed 115,487
Total Landmarks Generated 1,100,803
Total Consonantal Landmarks 676,646
Total V ocalic/Glide Landmarks 424,157
Consonantal-to-Vocalic Ratio 1.595
A key finding is the Consonantal-to-V ocalic (i.e., the ratio
of consonantal landmark tokens to vocalic/glide landmark to-
kens) landmark ratio of approximately 1.6. This value reflects
the canonical structure of our database, where most consonantal
phonemes are realized as a landmark pair (e.g., a Stop Closure,
<Sc>, and a subsequent Stop Release,<Sr>), while vowels
and glides are marked by a single event. Therefore, while con-
sonantal landmarks are more frequent, the underlying count of
sonorant phoneme nuclei (vowels and glides) is actually more
prominent in the English lexicon than consonantal phonemes.
Table 3 presents the absolute frequency of the eight primary
landmark types. As expected, the V owel landmark (<V>) is
the most frequent event, reflecting its role as the nucleus of syl-
lables. Events related to Stop consonants (<Sc>,<Sr>) are
the most common among consonantal landmarks, indicating the
prevalence of plosives in English.
Table 3:Absolute frequency of each landmark type across the
lexicon.
Landmark Type Frequency
V (V owel) 279,980
Sc (Stop Closure) 153,181
Sr (Stop Release) 153,181
G (Glide) 144,177
Fc (Fricative Closure) 99,016
Fr (Fricative Release) 99,016
Nc (Nasal Closure) 86,126
Nr (Nasal Release) 86,126
6283
4.3. Phonotactic Patterns
To investigate the landmark structure of English (i.e. the phono-
tactic structure at the level of 