Function words: a topic independent approach to word n-gram selection for
forensic speaker comparison
Michael Carne ID 1
1Speech and Language Laboratory, School of Culture, History and Language, The Australian
National University, Australia
michael.carne@anu.edu.au
Abstract
This paper highlights an issue with likelihood ratio-based foren-
sic speaker comparison (LR-based FSC) systems that exploit
speaker idiosyncrasies in word choice. A baseline experiment
using word n-gram features from speech transcripts of 104 Aus-
tralian male speakers achieves a Cllr of 0.60. However, it is
shown that topic dependent terms are included in the feature set,
which may bias the result. In turn, this may lead to an overesti-
mation of the strength of evidence obtainable from wordn-gram
based features. A simple but novel approach to circumvent-
ing this problem using function words is presented and evalu-
ated. An explicitly defined features set of 156 function words
is shown to yield a Cllr of 0.83. Subsequent evaluation of five
filter based feature selection methods applied to the set demon-
strates an notable improvement in performance when using the
ANOV AF -ratio procedure (Cllr = 0.78). This result is cou-
pled with a substantial reduction in dimension size to k= 50
features.
Index Terms: likelihood ratios, forensic speaker comparison,
n-grams.
1. Introduction
There has been some recent interest modelling speaker idiosyn-
crasies in word choice for the purposes of LR-based FSC. LR-
based FSC studies have demonstrated bag-of-grams representa-
tions of speech transcripts can discriminate same- and different
speaker pairs with reasonable success [1][2]. Similar studies
have examined speaker specificity in disfluency patterns such
as the occurrence of filler words e.g. [3][4]. The interest in
word choice idiosyncrasies in FSC stems from successes in Au-
tomatic Speaker Recognition (ASR) using speaker-dependant
n-gram models (e.g. [5]) and LR-based forensic text compari-
son (FTC) (e.g. [6][7]). This feature type also possesses charac-
teristics useful in a forensic context: robustness to transmission
differences, noise and signal distortion, and ease of interpreta-
tion [8].
Previous LR-based FSC studies have applied frequency
based methods for feature selection whereby thek most frequent
word n-grams are chosen to construct feature vectors [1][2].
This is a type of implicit feature selection since it not known
prior to vectorising the collection of speech transcripts what
will be included in the set [9]. An issue with implicit meth-
ods is that they do not preclude the occurrence of topic specific
terms in the feature set, which can bias the result [9]. While the
most frequently occurring n-grams tend to be function words
[10], which are argued to be relatively topic independent [11],
it is not guaranteed. In the present paper, the occurrence of topic
specific words is demonstrated in a baseline experiment using
208 speech transcripts from 104 Australian male speakers.
An alternative is explicit feature selection where the fea-
tures, and their representations, are known prior to constructing
and testing a model [9]. This paper presents and evaluates a
hybrid approach. An explicitly defined feature set consisting of
156 function words is used to eliminate the topic specific word
n-grams from the feature set, before applying implicit methods
to optimise performance. For the latter, five feature selection
methods are evaluated: frequency-based, mutual information
(MI), ANOV AF -ratio, chi-squared (χ2) and Variance threshold
(VT). This simple but novel approach has not yet been applied
in LR-based FSC for word n-gram features.
Function words (or ‘stop words’) are a closed word class
that serve grammatical rather than semantic functions in lan-
guage [12]. This class includes prepositions, pronouns, con-
junctions, auxiliary verbs and so forth. Function words have
been extensively used in authorship attribution and stylometry
(e.g. [13], [14]). Aside from their success in resolving ques-
tions of authorship [15], function words have several appealing
characteristics: frequency of occurrence (many observations are
available), an authours’ use of function words is largely uncon-
scious and relative topic independence [11]. The latter is ad-
vantageous where topic varies between comparison texts. By
extension these characteristics are appealing to FSC methods
that exploit speaker word choice where conversational topics
are mismatched.
1.1. LR-based FSC
The likelihood ratio framework has been applied to many ar-
eas of forensic science, including DNA [16], fingerprint [17],
illicit drug [18], text [7] and speaker comparison [19]. It is
increasingly recognised the fundamental framework for evi-
dential evaluation, where there is a requirement to draw infer-
ences about the origin known and questioned forensic material
[20][21]. The LR (Equation 1), from Bayes’ theorem, evalu-
ates the hypotheses as a ratio of conditional probabilities. The
numerator of the LR is the probability of the evidence ( E) as-
sumingHp (prosecution or same origin hypothesis) is true, the
denominator assumingHd (defence or different origin hypoth-
esis) is true. The data that representsE may be continuous (e.g.
voice acoustics) or discrete (e.g. DNA alleles, word n-gram
counts).
LR = p(E|Hp)
p(E|Hd) (1)
The value of the resulting LR gives the strength of evidence
in favourHp orHd. The direction and magnitude of this value
is proportional to the strength of evidence: an LR greater than 1
lends support in favour ofHp, an LR less than one supportsHd.
The LR is commonly presented on a logarithmic scale [22, p.
241–242]. In this case, log-likelihood ratio values < 0 support
6338
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3166
Hp, values> 0 supportHd.
2. Methods
2.1. Data and text pre-processing
Transcripts were made of speech from recordings of 104 Aus-
tralian male speakers from the AusEng 500+ forensic voice
comparison database [23]. For each of the 104 speakers,
two non-contemporaneous recordings from the casual tele-
phone conversation task were selected for transcription ( N =
208). The first two minutes of net speech from the record-
ings were manually transcribed verbatim. Pre-processing
steps for these experiments were implemented in Python’s
scikit-learn within the preprocessor argument of the
CountVectorizer() function using regular expressions or
built-in preprocessor functions. The text of each speech tran-
script was converted to lower case, digits and text annotations
such as descriptions of non-speech sounds ([laughter]) or in-
distinct audio ([indistinct]). Tokenisation segmented the text
of each into word unigrams. A unigram was defined as any
continuous run of characters, separated by spaces or punctua-
tion. This was achieved by using CountVectorizer()’s
word tokeniser, which implements this definition using the reg-
ular expression (?u)\b\w\w+\b. One of the effects of this
definition is that contracted forms like don’t are processed sep-
arately i.e. don and t.
2.2. LR model
The LR system employed was a feature-based two-level multi-
nomial LR model. In feature-based procedures, multivariate
probability density functions for Hp andHd are estimated di-
rectly from the feature values. These vectors consist of mea-
surements from a known ( x) and question source ( y) which
correspond to suspect and offender speech samples. Feature-
based procedures model the full multivariate structure of the
data. This has the advantage of preserving more information
relative to score-based methods [24][18]. Furthermore, feature-
based approaches permit evaluation of both the similarity and
typicality of comparison items [18]. The two-level LR is given
in Equation 2.
LR = f (Y|X,Hp)
f (Y|Hd) =
R
f (Y|X,Hp)f (π|X,Hp)dπR
f (Y|X,Hd)f (π|X,Hd)dπ =
B(A)B(A +X +Y )
B(A +X)B(A +Y )
(2)
, where Hp and Hd are respectively the prosecution (or
same-speaker) and defence (different-speaker) hypotheses. X
andY are the known and questioned speech transcripts respec-
tively. Each transcript is represented numerically as counts of
observations from k categories, in this case counts of n-grams;
X ={x1,x 2...xk}, Y ={y1,y 2...yk}. The distributions of
the categories are described by a multinomial distribution with
parameters π ={π1,π 2,...,π k}. In a two-level multinomial
LR a prior for these parameters is assumed. The Dirichlet distri-
bution is a conjugate prior of the multinomial distribution with
parametersA ={α1,α 2,...,α k}. The multivariate beta func-
tion,B(A) = Γ(α1)...Γ(ak)
Γ(α1+...+αk) , reduces the second equality to the
third [25].
2.3. Experiments
Two sets of experiments were performed. The first baseline
experiments made use of all word n-grams available (content
and function words) and a frequency based feature selection
was applied. In this method, unigrams were ordered in fre-
quency of occurrence and the k-best performing from testing
selected. This follows the approach taken in previous LR-based
FSC studies.
The second set of experiments evaluated a topic in-
dependent feature selection method using function words.
In these experiments, an explicitly defined set of function
words (Table 1) was first evaluated as a control, followed
by five filter based feature selection methods: frequency-
based, mutual information (MI), ANOV A F -ratio, chi-
squared (χ2) and variance threshold (VT) selection. All
feature selection procedures were implemented in Python
using the sklearn.feature selection class in the
scikit-learn library. For the supervised methods (χ2, MI
and ANOV A F-ratio) inputs consisted of a sparse matrix with
features (function words represented as unigrams) and counts
sampled from speech transcripts and a target vector correspond-
ing to the class labels (i.e. speaker IDs). For the unsupervised
VT method, input was a sparse matrix with feature and counts
and no class labels. The output was a list of features ranked
from most to least informative according the corresponding fea-
ture selection statistic. For all methods, the k-best performing
number of features were selected.
For all experiments, data was partitioned into test, reference
and calibration datasets. This was achieved via a random split
with 20% assigned to the test, 40% to the reference (or back-
ground) and 40% to the calibration dataset. The test dataset
contained test pairs labelled as same-speaker (SS) and different
speaker (DS) pairs. The test data set was used to evaluate the
FSC system validity (evaluation methods are described in Sec-
tion 2.4). The reference data was used to estimate parameters
for the prior (Dirichlet) distribution. The calibration data was
used in the score-to-LR conversion stage, specifically to calcu-
late the weights for the logistic-regression calibration procedure
5-fold cross-validation was applied. This was in order
to evaluate the performance of the FSC systems on different
speaker data and account for performance differences as a result
of sampling variability [26]. The cross-validation procedure in-
volved a random partition of speakers into 5 groups, which were
then iteratively assigned to test, reference and calibration data
sets. Results were evaluated with respect to the average of the
iterations.
2.4. Evaluation
The log-likelihood-ratio cost function ( Cllr) [27] was used to
evaluate the performance the FSC systems.Cllr measures a sys-
tems accuracy (or validity) by applying a a gradient penalty to
incorrect LRs: the higher the magnitude of the incorrect LR the
higher the penalty applied. Cllr values typically fall between
0 and 1. Smaller values of Cllr indicate better overall system
accuracy [28],Cllr equal to 1 indicates the system is not deliv-
ering useful information [29, p. 307]. Cllr > 1 results from
uncalibrated or poorly calibrated systems [28]. Two additional
measuresCmin
llr andCcal
llr are used to evaluate discrimination and
calibration loss respectively. An R implementation of the F oCal
toolkit [27] was used to calculate Cllr values. Tippett plots,
showing the empirical cumulative probability distributions of
LRs generated by the FSC systems for both same- and different-
speaker trials, are also produced for the evaluation.
6339
Table 1: Function words included in the feature set.
he she her it we
they him me you them
i his hers yours theirs
ours mine myself yourself yourselves
themselves ourselves himself herself itself
its while again further then
once here there when where
how all any both each
few more most other some
such no this that these
’s those what which who
who whom so why nor
not only own same than
too very just now and
but if or because as
in at on during of
by for with about into
against between before after above
below to from up down
out off over under through
’d ’ll ’m ’re ’ve
am is isn’ are aren’
was wasn’ were weren’ be
been being have haven’ has
hasn’ had hadn’ having does
doesn’ did didn’ doing could
couldn’ might mightn’ must mustn’
need needn’ shall shan’ should
shouldn’ will won’ would wouldn’
do don’ the a an
my your our their ’t
3. Results
3.1. Baseline experiment
Table 2 shows the performance of the baseline word n-gram
system consisting of unigram features extracted from speaker’s
transcripts. Result are for the best performing system ( Cllr)
using a frequency-based feature selection procedure, which is
typically applied in LR-based FSC systems modelling speaker
word choice. Results show the optimalCllr achieved by select-
ing the 450 most frequently occurring unigrams ( k= 450). The
Cllr value of 0.60 indicates the system is delivering useful infor-
mation. This performance is comparable to previous LR-based
FSC studies using word n-gram features. Discrimination loss is
relatively constrained (Cmin
llr = 0.48).
Table 2: Performance metrics for the baseline word n-gram sys-
tem.
feature k Cllr Cmin
llr Ccal
llr EER
unigrams 450 0.60 0.48 0.12 19.17
As expected the most frequently occur words are function
words or discourse markers. A sample of the top 10 most fre-
quently occurring words in the set of 450 unigrams is given in
Table 3 in rank order with frequency of occurrence (count).
However, on closer examination a total of 157 ( 35%) of
the unigrams contained in the feature set are content words
that relate to topic. Among the most frequently occurring were
(r =rank,f =frequency ): pretty (r = 75,f = 34), week-
end (r = 76,f = 29), time (r = 85,f = 25), work (r = 98,
f = 21), phone (r = 122,f = 14), week (r = 102,f = 19),
Table 3: Top 10 most frequently occurring unigrams.
rank (r) word frequency ( f)
1 i 441
2 you 413
3 yeah 410
4 the 326
5 oh 277
6 to 223
7 a 214
8 uh 194
9 it 183
10 um 180
morning (r = 109 , f = 17 ), name (r = 112 , f = 16 ) and
box (r = 171 ,f = 10 ). Lower frequency ungirams included
in the feature set are more obviously topic dependant, for ex-
ample: holidays (r = 231 ,f = 6 ), claustrophobic (r = 300 ,
f = 4 ), dave (r = 303 ,f = 4 ), city (r = 318 ,f = 4 ), radio
(r = 320 ,f = 4), scorpions (r = 327 ,f = 4), uni (r = 328 ,
f = 4 ), birthday (r = 334 ,f = 4 ) and quidditch (r = 410 ,
f = 3 ). It is uncertain therefore the extent to which discrimi-
natory power of the unigram features are related to speaker spe-
cific differences in word choice, or related to differences in the
topic of conversation. This is very likely leading to an overes-
timation of the strength of evidence obtainable. One approach
to this problem might be to prune low frequency words (e.g.
those occurring < 4 times). However, it is worth noting that
topic specific words weekend and work occur at relatively high
frequencies.
3.2. Topic independent feature selection
This section presents the results from experiments using the ex-
plicitly defined feature set of 156 function words listed in Table
1. These experiments use the same speakers and transcripts as
the baseline experiment described in Section 3.1. The perfor-
mance of the full set of function words is thecontrol condition
under the ‘method’ column. This was the control for evaluat-
ing alternative feature selection methods. Table 4 also shows
the results from evaluation for the k-best features following ap-
plication of the five feature selection methods. Note that the
performance of frequency-based (f) method and thecontrol is
the same. This is because the number of features required to
optimiseCllr required the full set of function words (i.e. 156).
The Cllr produced by the control is notably higher than
the baseline in Table 2, Section 3.1 ( Cllr = 0.83 vs. 0.60),
indicating poorer performance. The performance deterioration
stems from discrimination loss (Cmin
llr = 0.73 vs. 0.48) rather
than poorer calibration. Ccal
llr are more or less the same ( 0.11
vs. 0.12).
The F-ratio feature selection method outperformed other
methods, offering a notable improvement over the control
Cllr = 0.78 vs. 0.83 respectively. Across methods there is
little difference in calibration (Ccal
llr ). The main difference is in
Cmin
llr . Notable as well is the very substantial reduction in the
size of feature set required to optimise performance using the
F-ratio method, 50 features rather the 156 utilised in the base-
line. MI selection offers a slightCmin
llr improvement (−0.02 or
2.4% decrease) over the control, and reduces the dimension size
(k = 125 features vs. k = 156 for the control). Other methods
(VT ,χ2 andf) yield the same result,Cllr = 0.83.VT andχ2
6340
selection methods do however yield improvements in discrimi-
nation performance (0.70 vs. 0.73), but this comes at the cost of
worse calibration (0.13 vs. 0.11).
The Tippett Plots in Figure 1 show the results from the con-
trol (top) and best-performing feature selection method (bot-
tom), the ANOV A F-ratio method. The Tippett for the latter
(Figure 1, bottom) shows a improvement in the strength of evi-
dence the system is delivering post-feature selection relative to
the control (Figure 1, top). This is evident in the increased mag-
nitude of LRs obtained for both SS and DS comparisons. Before
feature selection (Figure 1, top), 9.3% of correctly assessed DS
comparisons (i.e.Log10LR< 0) exceedLog10LR< −1. Af-
ter feature selection this increases to 12% ( Figure 1, bottom).
The largest DSLog10LR achieved also is greater in magni-
tude,−3.7 vs. −2.7. There is only a slight improvement in
the strength of evidence obtained for SS comparisons, however.
The largest LR pre-feature selection is Log10LRs = 1.6 (Fig-
ure 1, top), which improves slightly to Log10LRs = 1.7 after
feature selection (Figure 1, bottom). There is a corresponding
improvement (4.5%) in the proportion of comparisons correctly
assessed, 74.7% SS trials are > 0 vs. 70.2% post and pre fea-
ture selection respectively. However, the worst counter factual
SSLRs from the trials (red lines crossing 0, Figure 1 bottom)
is somewhat larger post feature selection, −1.61 vs. −1.15.
Similarly, the magnitude of counter factual DSLRs is slightly
greater.
Table 4: Performance metrics for different feature selection
methods applied to function words. The control method is the
full set of function words listed in Table 1.
method k Cllr Cmin
llr Ccal
llr EER
F-ratio 50 0.78 0.66 0.12 24.41
MI 125 0.81 0.70 0.11 27.49
chi2 156 0.83 0.70 0.13 27.65
VT 156 0.83 0.70 0.13 27.65
f 156 0.83 0.73 0.11 28.27
control 156 0.83 0.73 0.11 28.27
4. Discussion and conclusions
This paper has demonstrated an approach for selecting topic in-
dependent word n-gram features for the purposes of LR-based
FSC. It was shown that the conventional method to wordn-gram
selection used in LR-based FSC retains topic specific terms,
which may bias the result. Therefore, an explicitly defined fea-
ture set consisting solely of function words is recommended.
Despite yielding poorer performance relative to the conven-
tional method, aCllr of 0.83 is demonstrated using a set of 156
function words. This has the added advantage of being robust
to differences in conversation topic. It was also shown that ap-
plication of ANOV AF -ratio feature selection can substantially
improve on this result (Cllr = 0.78).
At least two areas need to be addressed in future research.
First, function word based features need to validated under con-
ditions where speaking styles are mismatched. It is common
in FSC for the suspect recording to be obtained from a police
interview, which involves question-answer type responses (i.e.
‘yes’, ‘no’, ‘no comment’), or descriptions of past events (e.g.
‘This morning I went to’) in a narrative style, and the offender
sample from telephone conversations giving directions or in-
structions [30]. How such speaking style differences shapes the
Figure 1: Tippett plots: Function words before (top) and after
ANOVA F-ratio feature selection (bottom).
distribution of speaker’s function word use needs to be estab-
lished and impacts on the validity of FSC determined. Second,
extralinguistic factors may be relevant to speakers use of func-
tion words. Previous speaker recognition research has already
demonstrated, for example, differences between male and fe-
male speakers in word choice [5]. Where function words are
concerned, research in social psychology has demonstrated the
relative use of the pronoun ‘I’ is correlated with social status
(lower frequency in high status individuals) and negative af-
fective states (e.g. depression) [31]. Age related effects have
also been demonstrated, with the relative frequency of first per-
son pronoun use shown to diminish with age [32]. It may be
possible, however, to remove such confounding factors through
selection of an homogeneous background population.
5. Acknowledgements
This research is based on experiments from the authour’s un-
published PhD Thesis. I would like to thank the reviews for
their constructive feedback.
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI was not used in any part of the production of this
work.
6341