A Two-Stage Defence for Robust Federated Speech Emotion Recognition
Yi Chang1,∗∗, Sofiane Laridi2, Zhao Ren3,∗∗, Gregory Palmer2, Bj¨orn W. Schuller1, Marco Fisichella2
1 Group on Language, Audio, & Music, Imperial College London
2 L3S Research Center, Leibniz University Hannover
3 Cognitive Systems Lab, University of Bremen
zren@uni-bremen.de, y.chang20@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract
With machine learning and speech processing advancements,
speech emotion recognition has gained popularity recently.
However, speech data cannot be protected when it is uploaded
and processed on servers in the internet-of-things applications
of speech emotion recognition. Further, deep neural networks
have proven to be vulnerable to human-indistinguishable adver-
sarial perturbations. The adversarial attacks generated from the
perturbations may result in deep neural networks wrongly pre-
dicting the emotional states. We propose a novel federated ad-
versarial learning framework for protecting both data and deep
neural networks. The proposed framework consists of i) feder-
ated learning for data privacy, and ii) adversarial training at the
training stage and randomisation at the testing stage for model
robustness. The experiments show our proposed framework ef-
fectively protects speech data locally and improve model ro-
bustness against a series of adversarial attacks.
Index Terms: speech emotion recognition, human-computer
interaction, computational paralinguistics
1. Introduction
V oice-operated smart edge devices (e. g., Amazon Alexa1) are
becoming increasingly prevalent. These devices have benefited
from recent advancements within the field of machine learn-
ing, where Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) represent the current
state-of-the-art approach for analysing speech and recognising
emotional states [1]. Despite these advancements, the appli-
cation of DNNs to human speech data raises critical concerns,
such as ethics and fairness [2]. In this paper, we address two
typical challenges within this area:data privacyandmodel ro-
bustness towards adversarial attacks.
Data used in Speech Emotion Recognition (SER) often con-
tains private / sensitive information, especially in mental health
applications (e. g., detection of depression [3]). Therefore,
while smart edge devices may record an abundance of data,
there are concerns regarding the extent to which these devices
may leak private information [4]. These concerns, along with
strict legal and ethical requirements designed to protect user
privacy, can prohibit pooling user data to a server for building
global machine learning models in acentralised learningframe-
work. Federated Learning (FL) has recently emerged as an al-
ternative to centralised learning in many domains, including in-
telligent industrial production [5], healthcare [6] and SER [7].
Specifically, FL consists of a number of clients hosting a de-
centralised training dataset, where each sub-dataset resides and
remains on the respective client machine [8]. By traininglocal
**indicates the corresponding author.
1https://developer.amazon.com/en-GB/alexa
models with only sharing parameter updates with a centralised
server at each round [9], FL allows clients to collaboratively
train aglobalmodel without physically sharing their data. After
a specified number of rounds, each client sends their optimised
localparameters back to the centralised entity, where they are
aggregated (e. g., federated averaging [10]) for aglobalmodel.
The aggregated parameters are subsequently made available for
download, and the next training round can begin.
While FL takes steps towards mitigating privacy concerns,
questions remain regarding model robustness. In recent years,
there has been an abundance of literature demonstrating the vul-
nerability of DNNs towards adversarial attacks [11, 12]. Ad-
versaries learn to perturb partial units (e. g., pixels in an im-
age and time frames in an audio wave) within a given sample,
barely perceptible to humans, but capable of causing a misclas-
sification. Adversarial attacks are increasingly being used to
fool models deployed on smart devices often with malicious in-
tent [7], including SER models. For instance, such attacks can
be employed to disseminate toxic or hateful speech on social
media or online gaming platforms, thereby jeopardising public
safety. Additionally, malicious actors may manipulate speech
content to deceive automatic speech recognition systems and
further exploit SER models, potentially resulting in the spread
of harmful content [13]. Furthermore, in the realm of mental ill-
ness pre-screening, deliberate attacks on speech data might lead
to inaccurate diagnoses and unsuitable treatment [14]. There-
fore, improving the robustness of SER models is pivotal.
In this paper, we propose the first pipeline to protect FL
with a comprehensive approach in the domain of SER. Our main
contributions are three-fold:
i.) We develop a privacy-preserving FL framework for SER.
ii.) We compare two single-stage defences against adver-
sarial attacks: adversarial training and test-time randomisation.
Randomisation of log Mel spectrograms, when combined with
adversarial training, further improves model robustness com-
pared with adversarial training alone.
iii.) We further show that combining both strategies in a
two-stage defence improves robustness over vanilla FL and ei-
ther defence alone.
2. Background
2.1. Speech Emotion Recognition
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) plays an integral role in
the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI), serving as a corner-
stone for various real-world applications [15]. Research in
automatic emotion recognition has greatly advanced the capa-
bilities of HCI by enhancing both the quality of service and
user experience [16, 17]. The speech signal serves as a vital
medium for human communication, encapsulating a substantial
6260
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1125
amount of paralinguistic information (i. e., emotion states, atti-
tudes, etc.) [18]. Over the past few decades, SER has emerged
as a focal area within HCI research, leveraging techniques from
computational paralinguistics and machine learning to identify
emotions from speech signals [19]. In SER tasks, speech signals
are typically annotated with continuous values (i. e.,arousal,
valenceanddominance[20]) and/or discrete labels (e. g., the
‘Big Six’ proposed by Ekman [21]:anger,disgust,fear,happi-
ness,sadnessandsurprise). The continuous and discrete labels
can be converted to each other using a circumplex model [22].
In recent years, a set of acoustic features have proven to
be effective for distinguishing emotions from speech signals,
including low-level descriptors (e. g., energy features and spec-
tral features) and statistical functionals [23, 24]. Classic ma-
chine learning techniques, including but not limited to Support
Vector Machines (SVMs), have been successfully utilised to
analyse emotional states from speech signals [25]. In contrast,
deep learning mostly deals with either raw speech signals or
time-frequency representations, outperforming classic machine
learning approaches in recent studies [26, 27, 28]. Compared
to one-dimensional (1D) raw speech signals, two-dimensional
(2D) time-frequency representations have become more popu-
lar [29]. Typical time-frequency representations include spec-
trograms, Mel spectrograms, log Mel spectrograms, and Mel
Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs) [30, 31, 32].
2.2. Adversarial Attacks and Defences
The digital transformation in mobile networks and computing
ecosystems has resulted in an exponential rise in the number of
Internet users, connected devices, and Internet-of-Things (IoT)
implementations. Alongside this, there is an expansion in net-
work capabilities and a more demanding set of application re-
quirements. Concomitantly, the surge in digital activities has
paved the way for increasingly sophisticated adversary aimed at
compromising DNNs. Extensive research has already demon-
strated the vulnerabilities of DNNs to a range of malicious at-
tacks designed to craft adversarial examples with the specific in-
tent of sabotaging predictions of DNNs [33, 34, 35, 36, 31, 37].
There are two major categories of these attacks: 1)white-box
attacksthat consider the available model architecture; 2)black-
box attackswithout any knowledge of the model architecture.
Regardless of the category, the primary objective of these at-
tacks is to generate human indistinguishable adversarial exam-
ples to fool the victim DNNs. Notably, white-box attacks typi-
cally produce more subtle perturbations, prompting us to focus
on this more challenging attack in our study [38].
Adversarial examples reveal the inherent vulnerabilities of
neural networks due to their linear nature [39]. A variety of
countermeasures have been developed to fight against the ad-
versarial attacks. Adversarial training, for instance, is proposed
to improve the robustness of neural networks by training on a
dataset comprised of both adversarial and clean examples [40].
Ensemble adversarial training is proposed in [41] to further aug-
ment training data with perturbations generated from other pre-
trained models. Max-Margin Adversarial (MMA) [42] aims to
directly maximise the margins to the decision boundary and
minimise the adversarial loss on the decision boundary at the
shortest successful perturbation. Moreover, adversarial robust-
ness can also be achieved by including additional unlabelled
data and thereby reducing the sample complexity gap between
adversarial and clean samples [43, 44].
In addition to adversarial training, denoising techniques
have been developed to enhance a model’s robustness toward
adversarial attacks, such as high-level representation guided de-
noiser [45] and feature denoising [46]. However, these denois-
ing methods either include extra parameters to train or can be
circumvented because of obfuscated gradients [47]. Randomi-
sation is initially introduced as a defensive mechanism during
inference against adversarial attacks in the image domain [48].
This technique employs two specific operations: random re-
sizing and random padding. The former enlarges input im-
ages within a confined range, while the latter introduces ad-
ditional randomness by padding specific values around the re-
sized images. While adversarial training has been shown to
effectively enhance models’ robustness against single-step at-
tacks [41], such as the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [39],
random transformations, including resizing and padding, have
demonstrated efficacy in mitigating the effects of iterative ad-
versarial attacks like Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [49]
and DeepFool [50] due to their weak generalisation ability [48].
In the current study, we integrate both adversarial training and
randomisation to more comprehensively mitigate the effects of
single-step as well as iterative adversarial attacks.
3. Related Work
Our work stands as a seminal exploration in bolstering FL’s ca-
pability for SER models against adversarial attacks, an area that
has, until now, seen limited research focus. The application of
FL in SER has already been explored in terms of data privacy.
For example, a comprehensive study in [51] discusses the in-
herent advantages of FL in safeguarding sensitive SER data. FL
for SER has been proposed for several practical applications,
including monitoring the emotional state of the elderly in care
facilities [52], securing highly-sensitive healthcare data [53],
improving workplace environment through multi-modal emo-
tion recognition [54], and supporting mental health treatment
through conversational robots without compromising patient
data [55]. Related work has also addressed federated adaptation
under fairness and concept drift [56], affect- and offensiveness-
aware stance detection [57], and the interpretation of evolving
or event-bearing information in text [58, 59, 60]. Language-
model-enhanced graph learning has also been applied to online
multi-target tracking [61].
On the flip side, potential vulnerabilities in FL for SER have
also started to gain scholarly attention. Privacy attacks, which
aim to reverse-engineer trained models to recover confidential
data, are a growing concern [62, 52]. Model poisoning attacks
present another challenge; these are strategic interventions by
participants within the federated network aiming to sabotage the
model so that it misclassifies specific samples, potentially those
of relevance to competitors [63]. Both of these are distinct from
white-box adversarial attacks, the focus of our current investi-
gation, where the objective is to generate adversarial samples
that mislead the model at the inference stage.
Studies have investigated adversarial scenarios in cen-
tralised SER settings. An end-to-end scheme is proposed to
generate adversarial emotional speech data in [64]. In [65], au-
thors apply black-box adversarial attacks and explore defences
like adversarial training and Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) to enhance the SER model’s robustness. Furthermore,
a similarity-based adversarial training is proposed to protect
SER models against white-box adversarial attacks in our prior
study [31], and the transferability of black-box adversarial at-
tacks is enhanced by lifelong learning in another study [38].
While there has been extensive research on defensive meth-
ods such as adversarial training and ensemble diversity [66],
6261
many of these strategies are suboptimal for distributed ma-
chine learning settings. The main reason is that the devices
are scattered and may be exposed to different attacks simulta-
neously. The first attempt to adopt the concept of FL to pro-
vide a defence framework against various white-box attacks on
distributed networks is studied in [7]. The authors present the
FDA 3 approach, which is able to pool the knowledge of de-
fending against attacks from different sources. However, the
approach assumes anattack monitorcapable of determining
which type of white-box attack is being applied, which may
not be practically feasible. In contrast, we introduce an ad-
versarial FL framework designed to enhance data privacy and
bolster model robustness against a range of adversarial attacks.
This is achieved through a two-stage defence strategy, which
incorporates adversarial training during the training phase and
randomisation at the time of inference.
4. Problem Description
In this section, we describe the problem settings and three spe-
cific white-box attacks applied in this study: the Fast Gradient
Sign Method (FGSM), Projected Gradient Descent (PGD), and
DeepFool. Notably, the focus on white-box attacks is due to
their access to the model’s architecture and parameters, which
makes them more challenging to defend against [38].
Federated Learning Scenario:We assume an FL setting
withNdata owners (i. e., clients){F 1,...,F N}and their re-
spective sub-datasets{D 1,...,D N}, whereD i,i∈[1,N]is a
set of samplesXi and corresponding labelsYi. At the beginning
ofroundt, each clientF i downloads the parametersθ t of the
global aggregated modelMθt from the FL server and updates its
Mθi,t, whereθi represents the local model’s parameters. Then,
Fi uses itsD i to update its localM θi,t’s parametersθ i,t. Af-
terwards, the updatedθ i,t are sent back to the FL server and
aggregated. This generates a new global modelM θt+1, whose
parameters are sent back to each client forroundt+ 1.
White-box attacks on FL models:In this work, we inves-
tigate the extent to which we can design robust defence schemes
for federated learnt models against the following adversarial
white-box attacks.
The Fast Gradient Sign Method(FGSM) generates an adversar-
ial samplex adv from an individual input samplexin a single
step, using the sign of the gradient∇of a loss functionLof the
neural network [39]:
xadv =x+ϵsign(∇ xL(θ,x,y)),(1)
whereϵis a positive constant that determines the scale of the
perturbation.
Projected Gradient Descent(PGD) [49] is a more powerful
multi-step variant of FGSM:
xj+1 =x j +clip(ϵsign(∇ xjL(θ,xj,y))),(2)
wherejis the iteration step, andϵis a constant value that
affects the perturbation’s scale. To address the potential un-
boundedness of perturbed data generated by FGSM, the clip(·)
function aims to clip the perturbations into a small interval, i. e.,
|ϵsign(∇xiL(θ,xj,y))|≤η, whereηis a positive constant.
DeepFool[50] is an iterative attack aiming to find the minimal
perturbationrfor a successful attack. DeepFool estimates the
perpendicular distance and direction from an inputxto the de-
cision boundaryM(x) = 0. A constant(1 +ζ)is used to
multiplyrto generate the final perturbation ensuringM(x adv)
crosses the decision boundary:
xadv =x+δ, δ=r×(1 +ζ).(3)
DeepFool in binary classification can be extended to multi-
class classification according to the one-vs-all classification
scheme [50].
5. The Proposed Methodology
To address the challenges outlined in Section Introduction, we
present a novel FL framework to develop privacy-preserving
and robust SER models against white-box attacks on speech
data (cf. Figure 1). Operating under the assumption that each
client has its own sub-dataset already, our framework is com-
posed of three key components. First, a data pre-processing
module is utilised to extract log Mel spectrograms from each
client’s speech signals; these spectrograms then serve as the in-
put for the SER models. Second, we introduce an adversarial
FL module as a defensive strategy during training. Lastly, we
propose a randomisation module aimed at bolstering the mod-
els’ robustness at the time of inference. Each of these three
components will be elaborated as follows.
5.1. Data Pre-processing
We opt for log Mel spectrograms as the input to DNNs, because
of the linearity of the Mel scale with respect to human auditory
perception [67], as well as the good performance of log Mel
spectrograms when used as DNNs input in acoustic tasks [68].
Moreover, in federated learning, extracting log Mel features is
more computationally lightweight than training large waveform
encoders, crucial for edge devices. Log Mel spectrograms are
extracted from the audio dataD i of each clientF i. Log Mel
spectrograms use the Mel scale on the frequency axis of spec-
trograms which are linearly scaled. As a result, each clientF i
would have its own log Mel spectrogram dataX i used as input
to its local modelMθi,t at the roundt.
5.2. Defence at Training Time – Adversarial FL
As shown in Figure 1(a), adversarial FL is the first stage of
defence. To avoid training more complex neural networks and
the obfuscated gradient effects [47], we don’t use a denoising
technique. The adversarial training applied herein is vanilla ad-
versarial training [31], which provides better performance on
original data and comparable performance on adversarial data
compared to similarity-based adversarial training [69]. Specif-
ically, at the beginning of the roundt+ 1, the original training
dataXi of clientFi (i∈[1,n]) are divided randomly toX ′
i and
X ′′
i with equal number of samples. Afterwards, with its local
modelMθi,t from last roundt, white-box attacks are applied to
X ′′
i to generate its corresponding adversarial samplesX adv,i.
Subsequently, the union ofX ′
i∪X adv,i is used for the local
training. Notably, to match the amount of training data applied
in centralised learning, only half of the local training dataXi is
used to generate the adversarial examples. The loss function of
adversarial training is defined by
ˆL(θi,X ′
i∪Xadv,i,Yi) =α·L(θ i,X ′
i,Yi)+
(1−α)·L(θ,X adv,i,Yi), (4)
whereY i is the corresponding label ofX i, andαis a constant
value to adjust the ratio of loss calculated based on the half orig-
inal dataL(θ i,X ′
i,Yi)and adversarial dataL(θ i,Xadv,i,Yi).
Then, when the local training is complete, the new weightsθ i,t
are sent to the FL server for the next roundt+ 1. Because we
6262
FGSM
PGD
DeepFool
Generate 
Train
...
Converged?
No
Yes
 Randomise
Test data
......
OUTPUT
Attack
(b). Defence at Inference Time
FGSM PGD DeepFool
(a). Defence at Training Time
Aggregate
Attack
Classify
 
Extract
Generate 
Train
 
Extract
SplitSplit1
2 3
5
6
Generate 
Train
 
Extract
Split
4
Figure 1:Overview of the proposed framework. The sub-figure (a) consists of the following six steps: 1. Split the local training dataXi
of clientF i randomly and evenly intoX ′
i andX ′′
i , wherei∈[1,n]andnis the total number of clients. 2. Generate adversarial data
Xadv,i fromX ′′
i . 3. Train local modelM θi,t on the pooledX ′
i∪Xadv,i 4. Send trained model’s weightsθ i,t to server. 5. Aggregate
all the clients’ weights, resulting inθ i,t+1. 6. Send backθ i,t+1 to the clients for the next roundt+ 1. The sub-figure (b) shows the
randomisation at the inference time.
need a trained model to generate adversarial samples in our set-
tings, the adversarial FL training starts from the second round
onwards.
5.3. Defence at Inference Time – Randomisation
As depicted in Figure 1(b), two layers at the inference time
are applied: random resizing and random padding. The random
resizing layer randomly enlarges a log Mel spectrogram with
the dimension of(W,H,1)(W: Width,H: Height,1: channel
number) to the dimension of(W ′,H ′,1), whereW ′ andH ′
are randomly chosen from a reasonably small range (i. e.,0≤
W ′−W <β 1 and0≤H ′−H <β 2) to have no significant
effect on model performance on the original dataset [48]. Next,
a random padding layer fills in a certain valueγaround the
resized log Mel spectrograms, resulting in the final dimension
(W ′′,H ′′,1)as follows:
(W,H,1) random−−−−−→
resizing
(W ′,H ′,1) random− −−−−− →
padding
(W ′′,H ′′,1).
(5)
By tuning the hyperparameters (e. g.,β 1,β 2, andγ), we
aim to achieve dual objectives. First, we seek to ensure that
randomisation exerts a minimal impact on the models’ perfor-
mance when processing original, unperturbed data. Second, we
aim to mitigate the detrimental effects of adversarial attacks on
model performance. The incorporation of two computationally
efficient randomisation layers at the inference stage further en-
hances the models’ robustness against both single-step and iter-
ative white-box adversarial attacks.
6. Experiments and Results
In this section, we aim to validate the effectiveness of the pro-
posed two-stage defence strategies against adversarial attacks
within the context of FL. Specifically, we evaluate our approach
using the Database of Elicited Mood in Speech (DEMoS) [70],
a widely used dataset for SER. First, in Section 6.1, we discuss
the properties of this dataset and outline our data split strategy.
Next, in Section 6.2, we detail our experimental setup, including
the extraction of log Mel spectrograms from audio samples, the
model architectures employed, and the experimental settings.
Finally, in Section 6.3, we present our results.
6.1. Dataset
The DEMoS [70] is an Italian emotional speech corpus consist-
ing of7.7hours of audio recordings, collected from68speakers
(23 females and 45 males), and the DEMos has been widely ap-
plied in the SER domain [71, 72, 73, 38, 74, 31]. The dataset
includes a total of9,365emotional and332neutral speech
samples, and the speech utterances are produced in a realis-
tic manner with in-the-wild context. As the neutral state is
a minority class and to maintain comparability with previous
studies [73, 72, 38, 74, 31], it is not considered in our exper-
iment. Consequently, this work focuses on the9,365emo-
tional speech samples, which have an average duration of2.86
±1.26seconds. These samples are categorised into seven emo-
tional classes:anger,disgust,fear,guilt,happiness,sadness,
andsurprise. The DEMoS dataset ensures its representativeness
by including seven emotional states, employing diverse mood
induction procedures, and involving68native Italian speakers,
with rigorous selection processes and machine learning evalua-
tions to 