Improving Flow Matching based Text-to-Speech with Dual-Model Preference
Optimization and Classifier-Free Guidance
Minchuan Chen1, Chenchen Wan2, Junjie Li1, Peng Qi3, Shaojun Wang1, Jing Xiao1
1 Ping An Technology, China 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University Chongqing Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, China
minchuan.chen@gmail.com, wanchch7@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Flow matching is a powerful generative model and has
become a core component of modern text-to-speech (TTS)
systems. In order to ensure high-quality speech synthesis,
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) is widely used during the train-
ing and inference stages of flow matching based TTS models.
However, in zero-shot TTS, conventional training and inference
paradigms typically cannot effectively integrate human feed-
back, resulting in a mismatch between training objectives and
evaluation metrics. In this work, we propose a preference op-
timization method by separately modeling preferred and dis-
preferred information with two distinct models, which enables
better utilization of preferred and dispreferred data. We further
incorporate an improved CFG technique to enhance synthesis
adherence to the text and reference audio. Experiments demon-
strate that these optimizations significantly enhance intelligibil-
ity, speaker similarity and naturalness of synthesized speech,
outperforming the baseline model.
Index Terms: Text-to-speech, Flow matching, Direct prefer-
ence optimization, Classifier-free guidance
1. Introduction
Text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis has made great progress in re-
cent years, with the state-of-the-art systems producing speech
almost indistinguishable from human recordings [1, 2, 3] . One
of the most significant advancements is zero-shot TTS [3, 4],
which enables speech synthesis from the voice of an unseen
speaker given just a short sample of audio without training on
the specific speaker. This allows for diverse applications, from
personalized digital assistants to accessible tools and creative
content production, without extensive retraining.
Flow Matching (FM) [5] is a recent framework for gener-
ative modeling that has achieved state-of-the-art performance
across various domains, including image [6], video [7], speech
[8] and audio [9]. The framework of flow matching is based on
learning a vector field (also called velocity field) that smoothly
transports samples from a prior distribution to the target distri-
bution. It enables simulation-free training by directly regressing
the target vector field, without the need of solving ordinary dif-
ferential equations (ODEs) during training. As flow matching
has been demonstrated to accelerate both training and inference
compared to traditional diffusion models, many previous works
have utilized it for speech and audio generation tasks [10, 11].
To align the model’s generation with human preferences,
several preference alignment methods such as Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [12], Direct Prefer-
ence Optimization (DPO) [13] and Group Relative Policy Op-
timization (GRPO) [14] are proposed to guide model train-
ing. Recent studies have explored these methods to improve
the naturalness and comprehensibility of text-to-speech models
[15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. SpeechAlign [15] intro-
duced an iterative self-improvement strategy and constructed a
preference codec dataset to align speech language models with
human preferences. Koel-TTS [18] enhanced encoder-decoder
TTS models by incorporating preference alignment driven by
transcription accuracy and speaker similarity. Emo-DPO [20]
proposed a controllable approach, which employs DPO to dif-
ferentiate emotional nuances between emotions through opti-
mizing towards preferred emotions over less preferred ones.
FlexSpeech [22] applied DPO on the duration predictor to align
the generated durations with human preferences. Align2speak
[23] proposed a GRPO-based framework that optimizes multi-
lingual TTS model using multi-reward reinforcement learning,
significantly improving speech quality and adaptability for low-
resource languages. In this work, we use word error rate (WER)
and speaker similarity (SSIM) as proxy metrics to align model
outputs with human preferences, and analyze the influence of
preference data construction strategies and data scale.
Classifier-free guidance (CFG) [24] is originally introduced
to trade-off sample fidelity and diversity without relying on
a separately trained classifier in diffusion models. CFG bi-
ases the generation process towards the conditional distributions
while reducing dependence on the unconditional one, effec-
tively aligning the generated content with the provided prompts.
Current flow matching based TTS models have achieved im-
pressive results, however, there may be significant variation in
quality between the outputs sampled for the same input. This
poses a challenge for conditional flow matching models, where
the outputs may range from highly consistent to erroneous, de-
pending on the model’s responses to different prompts.
In this work, we propose a unified preference-aligned
framework for flow-matching-based TTS that integrates dual-
model preference optimization with an improved CFG strategy.
Instead of encoding preferred and dispreferred signals within
a single model, we explicitly model them using two separate
models, enabling more faithful representation of preference dis-
tributions and avoiding parameter conflicts inherent in single-
model optimization. To our best knowledge, we are the first
to integrate dual-model preference optimization with CFG in
flow-matching TTS. The key contributions are as follows:
1. We present a novel method that collaborates preference opti-
mization and CFG in both training and sampling processes for
flow matching based zero-shot TTS models, improving genera-
tion performance compared to the baseline.
2. For CFG, we adopt dynamic scaling and zero-init techniques,
leading to more stable and effective guidance for the inference.
3. We verify through extensive experiments that the proposed
method requires only a small amount of preference data for
training, while maintaining high data efficiency.
6921
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2412
Figure 1:The training and inference processes of the proposed
method.
2. Related work
2.1. Preference Optimization
Human preference optimization is a method of aligning model
outputs with human expectations and preferences. In zero-shot
TTS task [11], for a given text and context audio inputc=
(ctext,c audio), the model’s response distributionp(x|c) com-
prises a range of potential outputsxthat have different lev-
els of alignment with the desired criteria. By constructing a
dataset that explicitly labels certain responsesx w
0 as winner
(preferred samples) andx l
0 as loser (dispreferred samples), the
preference-based optimization algorithms can be leveraged to
shift the model’s distribution toward more preferred responses
while avoiding undesirable ones.
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [13] is a simple but
powerful method for aligning model outputs with human pref-
erences, which avoids the need for explicit reward modeling.
DPO uses pre-collected paired preference data to modify the
policyp θ by contrasting it against a reference policyp ref .
Specifically, given an inputcand a winning samplex w
0 that
is preferred over a losing samplex l
0, the preference alignment
objective can be expressed as:
LDPO =−E

logσ

βlog pθ(xw
0|c)
pref (xw
0|c)−βlog pθ(xl
0|c)
pref (xl
0|c)

(1)
whereσdenotes the sigmoid function andβis a parameter for
controlling the deviation from the reference policyp ref . The
formulation encouragesp θ to produce responses more similar
tox w
0 thanx l
0, effectively aligning the model with the desired
preferences.
2.2. Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG)
CFG [24] is proposed to enable guidance without the need for
an external classifier. Both conditional and unconditional mod-
els are trained simultaneously and their outputs are combined to
guide the generation process during sampling. For flow match-
ing, a flow modelv θ (xt,c) is trained to output both condi-
tional and unconditional velocity fields. Typically, the uncon-
ditional model can be jointly trained by dropping the condition
cwith some probability, and the same model provides velocity
estimates for bothv θ(xt)andv θ(xt,c). During inference, the
guided vector field˜vθ for the model is as follows:
˜vθ(xt,c) = (1 +ω)v θ(xt,c)−ωv θ(xt)(2)
wherext represents the noisy data at timestept,ωis to control
the strength of CFG,cis conditional input.
Although the CFG method is effective, it only considers the
semantic difference between conditional and unconditional in-
puts, while ignoring the preference and dispreference signals
derived from preference optimization training. Consequently,
CFG cannot accurately guide the model to enhance preferred at-
tributes or suppress undesired behaviors during sampling. From
a conceptual perspective, CFG can be viewed as denoising to-
ward the conditional distribution while repelling the uncondi-
tional one. This is structurally analogous to preference-based
guidance, although the underlying signals originate from condi-
tioning information rather than explicit preference supervision.
3. Method
Both DPO and CFG employ a preference-based framework
in their formulations. DPO learns preferences from feedback
provided by human (or proxy), while CFG utilizes multiple
prompting strategies to capture such differences. Commonly,
DPO and CFG rely on a single model to process and balance
the conflicting distributions of preferred and dispreferred. This
may cause parameter conflict and lead to weight offset, which
is a compromise between two opposing targets and cannot fully
achieve preference consistency. Diffusion-NPO [25] proposes
a technique to enhance CFG by training an additional negative
preference model. Similarly, CHATS [26] introduces a joint
training of preferred and dispreferred models, as well as a guid-
ance mechanism to achieve better performance. Motivated by
the success in text-to-image generation, we propose a novel
TTS model which combines preference optimization and CFG
in a unified framework. This method separately learns preferred
and dispreferred information with two distinct models. Com-
pared with aesthetic criteria in image preference optimization,
preference alignment for speech is semantically more complex
(intelligibility, speaker, prosody, etc.) and benefits from many
interpretable and scalable proxies (e.g., WER, SSIM).
To verify the feasibility of this approach, we use F5-TTS, a
representative flow matching based TTS framework as the base
model to study. The F5-TTS model is based on flow match-
ing with Diffusion Transformer (DiT) and is trained by a sim-
ple text-guided speech infilling task, effectively avoiding com-
plex design such as duration model, text encoder, and phoneme
alignment. In the pretraining phase, we retain the flow matching
objective function which is to match a probability path from a
standard normal distribution to a distribution approximating the
data distribution. Then, we continue to use DPO as preference
optimization method to improve the performance of the model
after pretraining.
3.1. Training
To completely decouple preference and dispreference informa-
tion, we adopt an approach to independently capture the char-
acteristics of the preferred and dispreferred distributions by two
distinct models, which are initialized from the same reference
model. We attempt to integrate them to better learn preference
and dispreference information. Inspired by [26], we solve the
problem of dual-model assistance through a unified objective
function. In this case, the naive DPO loss defined in Eq. (1) is
not suitable. Given the preference-ranked pairsx w
0 ≻x l
0 (pre-
ferred vs. dispreferred), to maximize the sum of reward scores
(rw
θ andr l
θ) from two models, the training objective can be re-
formulated as follows:
L=−E c,xw
0,xl
0
h
logσ

rw
θ (xw
0,c) +r l
θ(xl
0,c)
i
(3)
6922
In flow matching models, for the entire denoising chain from
xT tox 0, the loss for each ranked pair is defined as below:
L(xw
0,xl
0) =−logσ

βE

log pw
θ (xw
0:T )
pref (xw
0:T ) +log pl
θ(xl
0:T )
pref (xl
0:T )

(4)
Note thatcis omitted for compactness. The unified loss func-
tion is adopted to ensure that the two models can fully fit their
respective target distributions without being too far away from
the reference model, thereby stabilizing the training process.
3.2. Sampling
During sampling process, the two models collaborate using
a novel conditional strategy and seamlessly integrating their
strengths. We leverage the contribution of the distinct models,
one corresponds to the preferred distribution, denoted asp w
θ ,
and the other corresponds to the dispreferred distribution, de-
noted asp l
θ . Letx t be the noisy audio at steptandcbe the
condition. The sampling distribution can be expressed as below:
˜pθ(xt|c)∝p w
θ (xt|c)1+ωpl
θ(xt|c)αωpl
θ(xt)−(1+α)ω (5)
The three-term guidance combines outputs from both models
to guide generation toward preferred responses and repel unde-
sirable ones. Specifically, the sampling process can take advan-
tage of the preferred distribution while selectively incorporating
or eliminating aspects of the dispreferred distribution based on
the hyperparameterα. We construct a proxy-prompt by linearly
combining the promptcwith a null promptϕ:ˆc=−αc+ (1
+α)ϕ. The proxy-prompt is employed as input of the dispre-
ferred model:
˜vθ(xt,c) = (1 +ω)v w
θ (xt,c)−ωv l
θ(xt,ˆc)(6)
This approach reduces the number of forward passes required
for inference by unifyingcandϕinto a single representation,
thereby improving sampling efficiency.
3.3. Improved Classifier-Free Guidance
Previous research [27] has observed that CFG estimation does
not provide an optimal denoising direction, especially in the
early steps containing near-noise inputs [28]. CFG-Zero ∗ [29]
proposes two techniques to improve CFG: optimized scale and
zero-init. These changes introduce minimal additional compu-
tational cost but effectively improve the sample quality. In this
work, we explore combining these methods to improve CFG.
Firstly, an optimized scale factors∈Ris introduced for accu-
rate velocity estimation:
˜vθ(xt,c) = (1 +ω)·v w
θ (xt,c)−ω·s·v l
θ(xt,ˆc)(7)
s= (v w
θ (xt,c)⊤vl
θ(xt,ˆc))/∥vl
θ(xt,ˆc)∥2 (8)
wheresis a projection of the condition velocity onto the uncon-
ditional velocity. Secondly, in order to stabilize early sampling,
we can set the first few steps of the ODE solver to zero.
4. Experiments
4.1. Dataset and Experimental Setup
For the pretraining phase, we use WenetSpeech4TTS Premium
[30], a Mandarin dataset contains 945 hours of multi-speaker
corpus, and LibriTTS dataset [31], a multi-speaker English cor-
pus comprising approximately 585 hours of speech, as the train-
ing sets. For DPO, we construct different preference speech
datasets for training. Three solutions are employed to curate
the preference pairs. Firstly, we use ground truth asx w, and
speech samples generated by pretrained model asx l. An inter-
nal multi-speaker dataset is adopted to construct a preference
set that contains 2000 pairs, named as DT1. Then, we use se-
lected texts to synthesize samples. We select regular texts and
challenging texts (contain repeated texts, tongue twisters, etc.)
generated by DeepSeek. For each prompt text, we generate five
audio samples with the pretrained model by diverse sampling
hyperparameters (CFG strength). We then rank the generated
samples using Pareto optical ranking [18] based on preference
metrics (WER and SSIM), select the best and worst samples as
xw
0 andxl
0, respectively. The regular text-audio pairs are named
as DT2, and the challenging text-audio set as DT3, both contain
2000 pairs. We adopt Seed-TTS-eval [3] (test-en and test-zh) as
the test set, evaluating performance through different metrics.
We use F5-TTS Small as the baseline model, which consists
of 18 layers, 12 attention heads, and a 768-dimensional embed-
ding for the DiT block, and 4 layers with a 512-dimensional
embedding for the ConvNeXt V2 module, totaling 158M pa-
rameters. The proposed Preference-Aligned model is denoted
as: PA-Dual. During pretraining, the model is trained for 600K
updates on 4 NVIDIA A800 GPUs with a batch size of 153600
frames. In the DPO training phase, the model is trained for 10
epochs on 4 NVIDIA A800 GPUs with a batch size of 6400
frames. We follow the setting of F5-TTS Small, using the Eu-
ler ODE solver, sway sampling with coefficient -1.0, and the
pretrained V ocos [32] as vocoder. During sampling, we set the
number of function evaluations (NFE) to 32 andαto 1.0. For
CFG,ωis set to 2.5. We train all models on the identical pre-
training dataset. For comparison, we use the preference datasets
for single model DPO training based on F5-TTS Small model
with original CFG, denoted as: PA-Base.
4.2. Evaluation Metrics
We evaluate the synthesized speech on intelligibility, speaker
similarity and naturalness. Both objective and subjective eval-
uations are conducted to compare the proposed model with the
baseline. To evaluate model performance, we utilize Whisper
large-v3 [33] (for English) and Paraformer [34] (for Chinese)
as the automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems to com-
pute word error rate (WER), and WavLM-large-based speaker
verification model [35] for speaker similarity (SSIM) calcula-
tion. UTMOS [36] is employed to evaluate the naturalness of
synthetic speech. For subject evaluation, we conduct Com-
parative Mean Opinion Score (CMOS) and Similarity Mean
Opinion Score (SMOS) tests by recruiting 24 human partici-
pants to evaluate the speech generated by different models. We
randomly select 30 samples from unseen texts for evaluation.
For CMOS, evaluators compare synthesized and ground-truth
speech against a prompt, rating the naturalness difference on
a -2 to 2 scale. For SMOS, they score the similarity between
synthesized and prompt speech on a 1 to 5 scale.
4.3. Evaluation Results
We present objective and subjective evaluation results in Ta-
ble 1. Compared to the baseline model, preference alignment
training enhances the generation quality in all metrics. Experi-
mental results show that the dual-model framework yields better
optimization performance than the single-model one, suggest-
ing that it can more effectively capture preference and dispref-
erence information in the data. By combining DPO and CFG
into model training and sampling, both WER and SSIM show
6923
Table 1:Objective and subjective evaluation results on Seed-TTS test-zh and test-en.
Seed-TTS test-zh Seed-TTS test-en
Model WER↓ SSIM↑ UTMOS↑ CMOS↑ SMOS↑ WER↓ SSIM↑ UTMOS↑ CMOS↑ SMOS↑
Ground Truth 1.26 0.766 2.782 0.00 3.76 (±0.05) 2.06 0.732 3.535 0.00 3.95 (±0.10)
Baseline 4.24 0.553 2.575 -1.08 (±0.08) 3.49 (±0.07) 3.46 0.591 3.817 -0.65 (±0.09) 3.69 (±0.08)
PA-Base (w/ DT1) 3.93 0.561 2.603 -0.76 (±0.07) 3.56 (±0.15) 3.08 0.598 3.834 -0.46 (±0.08) 3.71 (±0.16)
PA-Base (w/ DT2) 3.45 0.592 2.686 -0.65 (±0.08) 3.62 (±0.09) 2.83 0.614 3.881 -0.37 (±0.11) 3.86 (±0.13)
PA-Dual (w/ DT1) 3.71 0.573 2.632 -0.72 (±0.13) 3.62 (±0.12) 2.89 0.601 3.903 -0.28 (±0.07) 3.78 (±0.07)
PA-Dual (w/ DT2) 3.06 0.628 2.733 -0.43 (±0.05) 3.68 (±0.08) 2.45 0.608 3.909 -0.25 (±0.07) 3.89(±0.15)
PA-Dual (w/ DT3) 2.87 0.634 2.728 -0.28(±0.06) 3.71(±0.10) 2.38 0.625 3.916 -0.19(±0.05) 3.85 (±0.09)
improved performance, indicating that the proposed method
yields superior intelligibility and speaker similarity. The objec-
tive evaluation metrics for naturalness and similarity (UTMOS,
CMOS, and SMOS) also show a consistent trend and varying
degrees of improvement compared to the baseline. The results
suggest that WER and SSIM are effective proxies for human
preferences, which facilitates efficient and scalable preference
alignment. We further explore several factors that can affect the
performance of preference optimization and CFG. Audio sam-
ples are available at:https://minchuan2025.github.
io/interspeech2026
4.3.1. Impact of preference data
We experiment with different methods such as proxy metrics
ranking and text selection to construct the preference pairs. As
shown in Table 1, the result indicates that using data pairs de-
rived from the natural speech and the generated speech for DPO
training yields only marginal improvements. This may be at-
tributed to the fact that distinguishing between real samples
and generated samples is trivial, leading to limited model ca-
pability enhancement. We find that the optimized models per-
form better when using the preferred-dispreferred pairs from
the model’s output distribution, whereas the proposed method
achieves lower WER results when the challenging text-audio
pairs are employed.
4.3.2. Data efficiency
We apply DPO on the pretrained model using different data
scales, and evaluate them on the Seed-TTS test-zh set. The
results of WER and SSIM are illustrated in Figure 2. The re-
sults show that as the number of preference pairs gradually in-
creases, the WER decreases and stabilizes at around 250 pairs.
The SSIM score increases with the amount of preference data
and reaches a plateau at around 500 pairs. The subsequent in-
crease in data volume does not bring significant benefits. This
demonstrates that only a small number of data pairs are suffi-
cient for the proposed dual-model preference optimization.
4.3.3. Effect of CFG scale
Applying CFG during inference to the preference-optimized
model leads to further improvements, achieving superior intel-
ligibility and speaker similarity. By controlling the CFG scale
during the inference process, we can better align the generation
with the conditional inputs. In our experiment, we varywbe-
tween 1 and 3 at 0.25 intervals. As shown in Figure 3, when we
increasew, the WER result shows a decreasing trend and the
SSIM score simultaneously increases for all models. Based on
the results, we choosew=2.5 as the optimal value.
4.3.4. Ablation study
To improve CFG, we use optimized scale and zero-init, which
zeroes out the first step of the ODE solver. We perform an ab-
Figure 2:Results of WER and SSIM on different data scales for
DPO training. Evaluated on Seed-TTS test-zh.
Figure 3:Effect of CFG scale on WER (left) and SSIM (right).
Evaluated on Seed-TTS test-zh.
lation study to analyze the sources of contribution. As shown
in Table 2, the results show that the PA-Dual model, combined
with the two methods, achieves higher intelligibility, speaker
similarity, and naturalness. We find that both methods improve
the quality of generated speech, while zero-init yields more pro-
nounced gains for the TTS model, as it avoids early-step timbre
collapse and phonetic instability.
Table 2:Ablation study of improved CFG.
Model WER↓ SSIM↑ UTMOS↑ CMOS↑
PA-Dual 2.86 0.634 2.728 -0.28 (±0.06)
w/o optimized scale 2.96 0.628 2.677 -0.40 (±0.05)
w/o zero-init 3.09 0.601 2.682 -0.42 (±0.08)
w/o both 3.13 0.578 2.616 -0.61 (±0.09)
5. Conclusion
In this work, we combine dual-model preference optimization
and improved CFG technique to enhance the training and sam-
pling processes of flow matching based TTS model. Different
from previous single model preference optimization, the pro-
posed method employs two distinct models to separately learn
the preferred and dispreferred distributions, and their guidance
signals are integrated for comprehensive generation. This ap-
proach ensures that the sampling process leverages the useful
information contained in both distributions, leading to better
preference alignment. Future work will explore model distil-
lation and LoRA training of preference optimization to reduce
additional overhead and storage.
6924
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
In preparing this manuscript, generative AI tools were used only
for language editing and min