Modulation of Phonetic Realizations in Cantonese Dialogue with Human and AI  
Interlocutors 
Xinyi Chen1, Grace Wenling Cao2, Yusheng Tian1, Manson Chun Man Wong1, Miko Hoi Tung Ng1, 
Tan Lee1,3, Peggy Pik Ki Mok1 
1 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR 
2 University College Dublin, Ireland 
3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 
xinyichen001@cuhk.edu.hk, grace.cao@ucd.ie, ystian@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, mansonwong@cuhk.edu.hk, hoitungng@cuhk.edu.hk, 
tanlee@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, peggymok@cuhk.edu.hk 
 
Abstract 
Speech patterns in human -AI interaction have received much 
attention recently. Prior research has focused on emotionally 
expressive systems in intonation languages. Less is known 
about how interlocutor identity (human vs. AI) shapes phonetic 
realizations in dialogue in tone languages. This study examined 
whether interacting with a human versus an AI interlocutor 
modulates phonetic properties in Cantonese. Scripted 
interactive dialogues in neutral and negative contexts with 
human and AI interlocutors in a Wizard -of-Oz setup were 
collected from 17 native Cantonese speakers. Word duration, 
F0 of the six tones and F1 and F2 of three corner vowels were 
measured. Results show evidence of phonetic modulation in AI 
interaction with shorter target word duration and specific tonal 
difference co mpared to human interaction. Emotional effect 
was marginal with a larger vowel space area in the negative 
context. The findings indicate more fine -grained interlocutor 
effects than previously reported. 
Index Terms : phonetic realization, human -AI interaction, 
emotion, Cantonese 
1. Introduction 
Speech modulation refers to the tendency for interlocutors to 
adjust their speech based on the characteristics of other 
interlocutors. This adaptive behaviour has been documented at 
multiple linguistic levels, such as  phonetic amd syntactic 
realizations, and has been widely observed in  human-human 
interaction across different types of interactant such as child-
directed (e.g., [1]), adult-directed (e.g., [2]), foreigner-directed 
(e.g., [3]) speech. Beyond these types of interactions, recently, 
with the rapid developments in the technology of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), human began communicating with AI -
generated speech products (e.g., Alexa). A new type of 
interaction has emerged, namely human-AI interaction. 
Prior work on phonetic modulation in human-AI interaction 
has largely focused on prosocial or positively expressive 
systems ([4], [5] ). These studies demonstrate d that humans  
modulated various aspects of their speech, such as duration and 
speech rate when interacting with AI interlocutors. However, 
recent proposals concerning ‘antagonistic AI’ [6] have drawn 
attention to synthetic agents that adopt less cooperative or even 
confrontational communicative styles. While such designs can 
make the agents or AI voice more diversified and more human-
like, little is known about how users react to these negative AI  
expressions. Although [4] and [5] included a small number of 
negatively valenced single-word interjections (e.g., darn), the 
effect of negative emotion  was not analyzed in detail.  As a 
result, it remains unclear how humans modulate their speech to 
negatively expressive or ‘antagonistic’ AI speech, highlighting 
a significant research gap. In view of this, this study examines 
the effect of emotion on human-AI interaction with a specific 
focus on negative emotion. 
At the same time, research on phonetic modulation has 
shown that task type matters  (e.g., [7]). While the shadowing 
paradigm reveal s rapid imitation effects, interactive dialogue 
tasks may elicit more subtle and temporally localized 
adjustments. As relatively less attention has been paid to how 
the identity of interlocutors (human vs. AI) shaped fine-grained 
phonetic realization in interactive settings, it is unclear whether 
interacting with a synthetic interlocutor would systematically 
influences phonetic properties of speech beyond global  
adjustments. Scripted dialogue paradigm provides an effective 
balance between ecological validity and experimental control, 
allowing investigation of conversational modulation under 
tightly controlled lexical content.  Previous research using 
scripted dialogue tasks ha s demonstrated differences in the 
modulation of  speech features  between tasks , such as F 0, 
intensity, and vowel formants (e.g., [8]), supporting its 
feasibility for investigating phonetic modulation under 
controlled yet interactive condition. 
The present study adopted the scripted dialogue paradigm 
to examine whether interlocutor identity (Human vs. AI) and 
emotional stance (Neutral vs. Negative) modulate phonetic 
realizations in Hong Kong Cantonese.  Specifically, we 
investigated acoustic measures including utteramce speech rate, 
duration of the target words, time-normalized F0 trajectories of 
the lexical tones and the first two formants (F1 and F2) of the 
target vowels . Besides, emotional stance was manipulated 
within dialogue to explore how ne gative emotion modulates 
acoustic realization in interaction. 
Very few previous studies on human -AI interaction ha ve 
investigated tone language s, as they tended to  focus on 
intonation languages (e.g., English in [8], [9], [10], and German 
in [7], [11], [12] ). Cantonese, a tone language with six 
contrastive lexical tones, provides a particularly suitable testing 
ground due to its rich tonal system, which includes  three level 
(high-level, 55; mid-level, 33; low-level, 22), two rising (high-
rising, 25 ; low -rising, 23 ), and one falling (low-falling, 21)  
tones. As part of a larger study  on phonetic accomodation of 
Cantonese sound change  features, some target words of this 
project in this study consist of the segmental sound change 
features. Nevertheless, as th is study investigated the acoustic 
aspects of speech modulation, sound change is not the focus. 
This exploratory study asked two main research questions: 
(1) Does interacting with an AI versus a human interlocutor 
influence fine-grained acoustic realization s in Cantonese? (2) 
Does emotional stance further modulate these interlocutor -
related effects? By examining acoustic measures including 
duration, fundamental frequency (F0) and vowel formants (F1 
and F2) in interactive speech, this study aim ed to expand our 
understanding o f how interlocutor identity shapes phonetic 
realizations in human -AI communication. Despite being 
exploratory, based on insights from previous work, we 
hypothesized that interlocutor identity would exhibit an effect 
4004
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1194
on the phonetic realizations of Cantonese  globally, with 
additional fine -grained, localized impacts depending on 
specific lexical tones, which is further modulated by  the 
emotional stance.  
2. Method 
The study employed a within -subject design manipulating 
Interlocutor Identity (Human vs. AI) and Emotional Stance 
(Neutral vs. Negative) to examine whether participants 
responded to emotionally expressive speech differently and 
exhibited different acoustic patterns between interlocutor 
identities. 
2.1. Participants 
Seventeen native Hong Kong Cantonese speakers participated 
in this experiment (9M, 8F; aged 18 -27, M = 21.17). They 
reported having normal hearing and no history of speech 
disorders or cognitive disabilities. Upon arrival, participants 
provided informed consent and completed a language -
background questionnaire. The experiment was conducted in a 
sound-proof booth. The participants were compensated for their 
participation in the experiment. 
2.2. Materials and stimuli 
2.2.1. Dialogue construction 
The experiment used a scripted dialogue task based on the 
Wizard-of-Oz paradigm [13] (see more in Section 2.3). Similar 
to the alternative reading task in [14], [15] , participants first 
read their scripted dialogue turns aloud to familiarize 
themselves with the content. They then engaged in an 
interactive phase with pre -recorded audio -video stimuli of 
either a human or an AI model talker.  
Each dialogue consisted of six alternating turns (three by 
the model talker and three by the participant). Across the 
experiment, there are 20 dialogues. The target word occurred 
six times in each dialogue: twice in the model talker (1st and 5th 
turn); four times in the participants (2nd and 6th turn). The target 
words are  中午 (/tsʊŋ55 ŋ̩
23/, ‘noon’), 五個 (/ŋ̩
23 kɔː33/, ‘five 
items’), 誤會 (/ŋ̩
23 wuːi22/, ‘misunderstanding’), 領悟 (/lɪŋ23 
ŋ̩
22/, ‘understand’), 理想 (/lei23 sœːŋ25/, ‘ideal’), 上車 (/sœːŋ23 
tsʰɛː55/, ‘buy a property’), 影相 (/jɪŋ25 sœːŋ25/, ‘take a photo’), 
商務 (/sœːŋ55 mou22/, ‘business’), 尼龍 (/nei21 lʊŋ21/, ‘nylon’), 
普洱 (/pʰou25 nei25/, ‘Pu'er tea’), 意外 (/jiː33 ŋɔ:i22/, ‘accident’), 
愛心 (/ɔːi33 sɐm55/, ‘care’), 曖昧 (/ɔːi25 muːi22/, ‘ambiguous’), 
睇書 (/tʰɐi25 syː55/, ‘read a book’), 暑假 (/syː25 kaː33/, ‘summer 
holiday’), 薯條 (/syː21 tʰiːu21/, ‘French fries’), 種樹 (/tsʊŋ33 
syː22/, ‘plant a tree’), 肥膩 (/fei21 nei22/, ‘greasy’), 癡呆 /tsʰiː55 
ŋɔːi21/, ‘Alzheimer’s’), and 餌塊 (/nei22 faːi33/, ‘rice cake’).  
As the example shown in Table 1, in participant (B)’s 
utterances, the target disyllabic word 中午 (/tsʊŋ55 ŋ̩
23/, ‘noon’), 
highlighted in bold, was always positioned medially to 
minimize potential prosodic boundary effects. In total, each 
participant was expected to produce 80 utterances (4 turns x 20 
dialogues).  
2.2.2. Emotion manipulation 
Two emotional conditions were implemented: neutral and 
negative. Each dialogue began with two neutral turns 
introducing the topic. Starting from  the 3rd turn, the model 
talker shifted to a negative stance (e.g., blame, complaint, or 
criticism), and the participant responded accordingly  until the 
end of that dialogue . Emotion was conveyed through both 
dialogue context, facial expression and natural prosody 
expressing criticism or dissatisfaction. Target words appeared 
in both neutral and negative turns of th e dialogue  equally, 
allowing comparison across emotional contexts. As illustrated 
in Table 1, the target word 中午 (/tsʊŋ55 ŋ̩
23/, ‘noon’) occurred 
in both stances twice. Also, e ach turn only consisted of 2 to 3 
short utterances with fewer than 20 Chinese characters . This 
was specifically designed to balance production ease, natural 
conversational flow, and token comparability.  
2.2.3. Human and AI model talkers 
In the human condition, a female native Cantonese speaker 
recorded both audio and video stimuli using a SONY video 
recorder. The talker faced the camera in the front and 
maintained eye contact to simulate a real-time video call. In the 
AI condition, the visual sti muli of an avatar were generated 
using iPhone Memoji [16] to convey facial gestures associated 
with negative emotion. Recordings in both human and AI 
conditions were done simultaneously. To avoid the pitfalls of 
previous studies on using ex isting AI assistants which voices 
are different from the human interlocutors in the experiments, 
the present study developed a customized TTS voice for the AI 
model talker trained on approximately 3000 Cantonese 
sentences recorded by the same female speaker used in the 
human condition, using a modified version of the duration -
informed DurIAN [17] model, which takes phoneme duration, 
pitch, and energy as input parameters. These features were 
extracted from the original human recordings and used as input 
to control t he synthesis process. This allowed the synthes ized 
speech to closely replicate the prosody, and rhythm of the 
original recordings while preserving the unique pronunciation 
style and voice quality of the model interlocutors. The 
generated AI voice preserved key speaking characteristics of 
the original s peaker while exhibiting a slightly mechanical 
quality due to reduced resolution and timbral differences. The 
synthesized audio replaced the original audio track in the AI 
videos. This procedure ensured compara ble speech content, 
posture, and facial orientation across human and AI conditions.  
Table 1: Structure of a scripted dialogue. 
A 中午喇，準備去食飯未呀？[NEU] (It’s noon now, are 
you ready to go eat yet?) 
B 差唔多喇，我諗中午度度都會好多人，咁你中午諗住
食咩呀？ (Almost, I think everywhere will be crowded 
at noon, so what are you thinking of eating at noon?) 
A 你問嚟做咩啫？次次都做跟尾狗，煩唔煩㗎啫！
[NEG] (Why are you asking? You always follow along 
like a tailwagging dog. Don’t you find that annoying?) 
B 使唔使噉講嘢啊，我只係想參考下你嘅意見啫。(Do 
you need to talk like that? I just wanted to get your 
opinion.) 
A 日日都問，係咪以後中午食咩都要同你匯報啊？
[NEG] (You ask that every day. Do I need to report to 
you what I eat at noon from now on?) 
B 乜你中午食咩都咁神秘，以後中午都唔問你囉！
(Why is what you eat at noon so secretive? I won’t ask 
what you’re having at noon anymore then!) 
Note: A = Model talker, B = Participant; NEU = Neutral 
emotion, NEG = Negative emotion 
2.3. Procedure 
The experiment was implemented in E -Prime 3.0 software 
(Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA) [18]. Participants 
completed two practice dialogues with neutral content. Then 
they completed 20 experimental dialogues: 10 with the human 
model talker and 10 with the AI model talker.  The interlocutor 
order was counterbalanced across participants. An on -screen 
message indicated when the dialogue interlocutor switched. 
4005
The experiment followed a Wizard -of-Oz setup [13]. The 
experimenter, located in a neighboring room, controlled the 
timing of the dialogue turns while monitoring participants’ 
speech in real time via Zoom audio [19]. They were informed 
that the audio would be used solely for communication 
purposes, allowing them to contact the experimenter in case of 
unexpected issues (e.g., technical errors). Yet, they were not 
informed about the Wizard-of- Oz setup. 
2.4. Acoustic and statistical analysis  
Acoustic analyses were conducted in Praat [20]. Duration of the 
target words and character and utterance-level speech rate were 
analyzed using linear mixed -effects models implemented in 
lme4 [21] in R [22]. Fixed effects included Interlocutor Identity 
(Human vs. AI) and Emotional stance (Neutral vs. Negative). 
Random intercepts for Participant and Dialogue were included 
to account for repeated measures. Model parameters were 
estimated using restricted maximum likelihood (REML). F0 
trajectories of the target words were analyzed using generalized 
additive mixed models (GAMMs) implemented in mgcv, using 
the bam() function [23]. The dependent variable was speaker -
normalized zF0 sampled at ten normalized time points per 
syllable. Non -linear contour shapes were modeled using 
smooth terms over normalized time, with separate smooths for 
each Interlocutor  Identity × Emotion × Tone  Category. This 
study included all six tones in Cantonese. Random intercepts 
for Participant and Token were included. 
3. Data processing and analysis 
Audio recordings were first force -aligned using Montreal 
Forced Aligner (MFA) [24] and subsequently manually 
corrected by phonetically -trained native Cantonese speakers. 
The corrected data were segmented at multiple hierarchical 
levels: (1) utterance level (for each utterance containing a 
noticeable pause), (2) syllable level for each Chinese character, 
(3) target -word level (disyllabic target words, with separate 
intervals for each syllable), and (4) sonorant level within each 
syllable and (5) vowel level.  Segmented data were processed 
using ProsodyPro [25] for data extraction. 
3.1. Durational analysis 
Acoustic measures included utterance -level speech rate 
(syllables per second), target word duration (ms , e.g., 中午 
/tsʊŋ55 ŋ̩
23/, ‘noon’), and target character duration (ms, e.g., 中 
/tsʊŋ55/, ‘middle’). The target disyllabic word duration included 
short pause between two target characters rather than a simple 
combination of the two target monosyllables. Linear mixed - 
effects models were fitted with Interlocutor Identity (Human vs. 
AI) and Emotional stance (Neutral vs. Negative) as fixed 
effects. Random intercepts were included for Participant and 
Dialogue to account for repeated measures. 
Table 2: Duration of target words. 
Target type Interlocutor Emotion Mean duration (ms) 
Disyllabic 
Word 
Human Neutral 381±97.6 
Negative 380±91.0 
AI Neutral 370±84.8 
Negative 375±86.8 
Syllable 
Human Neutral 194±58.0 
Negative 194±62.4 
AI Neutral 187±51.7 
Negative 191±56.8 
 
The linear mixed effect model revealed a significant main 
effect of Interlocutor  Identity (β = -10.891, p = .04) for the 
duration of the target disyllabic word, indicating shorter 
durations in the AI condition relative to the Human condition. 
No significant main effect of Emotion or interaction between 
Interlocutor Identity and Emotion was found. Table 2 presents 
the means of the duration. For target syllable duration, the 
mixed-effects model revealed a marginal main effect of 
Interlocutor Identity (β = -5.986, p = .06), again with a trend of 
shorter durations in the AI condition. For utterance-level speech 
rate, no significant effects of Interlocutor Identity or Emotion 
were found. This indicates that the Interlocutor effect on 
duration was mainly located in the target words rather than as a 
global speech rate phenomenon. 
3.2. F0 trajectory analysis 
F0 contours were analyzed at the level of tone-bearing syllables 
(target syllables). For each syllable, F0 was sampled at ten 
equally spaced normalized time points (0 –100%) across the 
sonorant interval. To reduce inter -speaker differences in pitch 
range, F0 values were z -normalized within speaker to enable 
cross-speaker comparison. Time -varying F0 trajectories were 
modeled using generalized additive mixed models GAMMs  
([26], [27]). The dependent variable was normalized F0 , while 
the Tone Category (6 Tones) × Interlocutor Identity (Human vs. 
AI) × Emotion (Negative vs. Neutral) was fitted as the 
predictors. Smooth terms modeled the F0 trajectory over time, 
including the above-mentioned predictor-specific smooths and 
participant-specific random smooths. An AR(1) autocorrelation 
structure was included.  
Time-localized differences between Interlocutor Identity 
and Emotion across six tones were assessed using the plot_diff 
function in the itsadug package [28]. Time intervals in which 
two curves were significantly different were identified when the 
95% confidence interval of the difference did not include zero.  
For the current set of participants (n = 17), the Interlocutor 
Identity and emotion effects were tone-specific and temporally 
localized. As shown in Figure 1, for Tone 1 (significant 
difference interval: 2.55 ~ 7.73), Tone 4 (significant difference 
interval: 1 ~ 5) under neutral emotion and Tone 4 under 
negative emotion (significant difference interval: 1.18 ~ 8.36), 
participants’ productions toward an AI interlocutor exhibited a 
significantly raised F0 contour compared to a Human 
interlocutor. Convers ely, for Tone 5 (significant difference 
interval: 4 ~ 8 .45) under neutral emotion, participants’ 
production toward an AI interlocutor exhibited a significantly 
lowered F0 contour compared to a Human interlocutor. 
Emotion effect was observed in Tone 2 only. Participants’ 
production under negative emotion exhibi ted a sign ificantly 
raised F0 contour compared to neutral emotion for both 
interlocutor identities (significant difference interval: AI: 1.36 
~ 10; Human: 1.45~10). 
 
Figure 1: Smoothed curves of the tone contours 
produced contrasted by different interlocutors (right 
panels) and by different emotions (left panels). 
3.3. Vowel space analysis 
Six target words containing the corner vowels /i/ /a:/ / ʊ/ were 
analyzed for the vowel space analysis. These vowels were from 
the target words so they appeared in both emotions equally but 
4006
not Interlocutor Identity. Therefore, we restricted our analysis 
of the effect of emotion only  to avoid any potential 
overgeneralization caused by imbalanced data. Due to the lack 
of /aː/ vowel, one token of /aː/ was extracted from the first half 
of the diphthong / aːi/. The F1 and F2 values of all the other 
vowels were measured from the 10% to 100% portion of the 
vowel (excluding the initial 10% to avoid consonantal transition 
effects). The diphthong / aːi/ was measured using the 10% to 
40% portion of the vowel.  
Midpoint F1 and F2 values were averaged across tokens for 
each vowel category (/iː/, /aː/, / ʊ/) within each participant, 
Interlocutor Identity, and Emotion. The resulting mean formant 
values were converted from Hz to the ERB scale using the 
normErb() function in the phonR package [29] to obtain 
perceptually scaled vowel space representations. The three 
corner vowels were then used to compute the vowel space area 
(VSA) as the area of the triangle defined by their ERB -
transformed F1–F2 coordinates. A linear mixed -effects model 
revealed a marginal effect of emotion on vowel space area (β = 
1.07, p = .057), with larger VSA in negative relative to neutral 
emotion, as shown in Figure 2. Random intercept for participant 
was included to account for between-speaker variability.  
 
Figure 2: Vowel space by emotion. Points represent 
individual vowel tokens plotted in ERB-transformed 
F1–F2 space. Triangles connect the mean values of 
/iː/, /aː/, and /ʊ/. 
4. Discussion 
This study investigated whether phonetic realizations differ 
between human-human and human-AI scripted dialogue in the 
tone language Cantonese, and whether emotional stance further 
modulates such differences. With respect to temporal measures, 
overall utterance speech rate did not differ significantly 
between interactions with AI and human interlocutors. 
However, target word duration was significantly shorter in the 
AI condition, for both the target disyllabic words and target 
syllables, indicating a more selective effect on the target items 
than a general global change in speech rate. Given that the target 
words recurred multi ple times throughout the dialogue, they 
represent a stable and reliable locus for examining the 
Interlocutor effect. The shorter durations observed in the AI 
condition may reflect more succinct speech directed toward an 
AI interlocutor, potentially indicating reduced elaboration or 
increased communicative efficiency. This pattern contrasts with 
previous findings reporting longer durations [5] and slower 
speech rates [8] in speech directed toward AI relative to human 
interlocutors. Further work is needed to investigate the contrary 
findings. One possible reason is that the voice and speech rate 
of the AI interlocutors in previous studies were provided by 
existing AI assistants (e.g. Alexa) which differed from those of 
the human interlocutors. The experimenters had no control over 
the AI voices. It is possible that speech rates might be different 
in the AI and Human conditions in previous studies, which 
could confound the f indings. Nevertheless, in our study, both 
the voice and the speech rate were comparable in the AI and 
Human conditions as the AI voice was customized based on the 
human voice. Thus, the consistent finding of shorter target word 
duration in our study is robust.  
In terms of F0, Tone 1 and Tone 4 were raised while Tone 
5 was lowered when the participants were conversing with an 
AI interlocutor in a neutral emotion. Additionally, Tone 4 was 
also raised when conversing with an AI interlocutor in negative 
emotion. There was no significant F0 difference in the other 
tones. The results indicate that the Interlocutor effect was tone-
specific rather than a general shift of F0 height. Previous studies 
showing an overall shift in mean F0 (e.g., a higher mean F0 in 
English [8] and German [11] or a lower mean F0 in English 
[10]) when participants interacted with AI assistants were all 
based on  intonation languages. They did not investigate