Attentive Mamba: Channel-wise Local Attention for Speech Recognition
Jen-Tzung Chien ID 1, Fan-Che Feng1, Ching-Hsien Lee2
1 Inst. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
2 Information and Communications Research Labs, Industrial Technology Research Institute, Taiwan
{jtchien,fanchefeng.ee12}@nycu.edu.tw, C.H.Lee@itri.org.tw
Abstract
State space models (SSMs) have emerged as a powerful alter-
native to transformers for speech recognition, but the perfor-
mance is constrained due to static local aggregation. This pa-
per presents an attentive SSM that integrates a causal convolu-
tional attention where the static convolution is upgraded with a
channel-wise local attention. The proposed module first con-
textualizes queries, keys, and values via causal depth-wise con-
volutions before applying cross-channel attention over a tem-
porally local window. This architecture is motivated by the
inherent structure of speech spectrograms, where distinct fre-
quency channels contain temporally coherent patterns that can
benefit the channel-specific modeling prior to their integration.
This design facilitates dynamic parameterization of the state
transition matrices, leading to the expressive acoustic features.
Experimental results confirm the merit of integrating dynamic
channel-wise attention into SSM for speech recognition.
Index Terms: state space model, channel-wise attention, causal
convolution, speech recognition
1. Introduction
End-to-end automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems,
driven by neural networks, have achieved substantial advance-
ments [1, 2]. The architectures based on self-attention, partic-
ularly in the transformers [3–5], have become a de facto stan-
dard, celebrated for their proficiency in capturing long-range
dependencies. Nevertheless, transformers are constrained due
to their quadratic computational complexity for self-attention
[6, 7], which poses a bottleneck for processing long sequences.
The unconstrained attention may result in unstable alignments
[8]. This weakness has motivated the exploration of alterna-
tive architecture. Concurrently, state space models (SSMs) have
emerged as an efficient alternative to sequence modeling [9,10].
Modern selective SSMs, like Mamba [11–13], has shown linear-
time complexity and excelled at modeling long-range context
by dynamically parameterizing their state transitions based on
input content. This allows SSMs to selectively propagate or for-
get information over sequences, making them highly effective
for ASR. However, each of these dominant architectures has
its own trade-offs. While transformers excel at content-based
global interactions, they can be less efficient at extracting fine-
grained local patterns. Conversely, while Mamba’s SSM core is
adept at efficiently capturing global context, its selection mech-
anism relies on a static depth-wise convolution to process local
information. This fixed-kernel approach, though efficient, lacks
the dynamic, content-aware adaptability that attention mecha-
nism provides for local feature aggregation.
This paper presents an approach to combine the strengths of
transformer and SSM. We hypothesize that a model’s expressive
power can be significantly enhanced by synergizing the global
context modeling of SSM with the dynamic local features ex-
tracted by self-attention. We accordingly propose the atten-
tive Mamba, a novel block that replaces the static convolutional
projection in Mamba architecture with a lightweight, efficient
channel-wise local attention. Our approach aims to achieve the
best of both paradigms, namely the linear complexity and long-
range dependency modeling using SSM, augmented by the fine-
grained, adaptive modeling of local correlations using atten-
tion. The experiments on read and spontaneous speech recog-
nition show that the proposed attentive Mamba achieves signif-
icant performance improvements over strong baseline models
on ASR benchmarks. These results validate that dynamically
weighing local information via attention provides a beneficial
solution to parameterize the SSM’s global state transitions.
2. Transformer versus State Space Model
Transformer architecture, driven by the self-attention mecha-
nism [3, 14], has become a dominant paradigm in sequence
modeling [15, 16]. By computing pairwise scores between in-
dividual input tokens, self-attention enables a model to dynam-
ically adjust the importance of tokens when constructing the
representation for each single token. This capacity for content-
based global interaction allows a powerful modeling of com-
plex, long-range dependencies. This comprehensive modeling
capability, however, is accompanied by a quadratic computa-
tional and memory complexityO(T 2)with respect to sequence
lengthT. This complexity poses a significant bottleneck when
involving the applications with long sequences. Significant ef-
forts have been devoted to mitigating this computational cost.
One line of researches focuses on optimizing the execution of
the exact attention computation, e.g. the hardware-aware algo-
rithm like FlashAttention [17, 18] that accelerated the training
and inference without altering the output. An alternative archi-
tectural strategy involves constraining the attention’s receptive
field. Local attention in [19, 20] restricted each token to attend
only a window of fixed sizew, wherew < T, for neighboring
tokens. While sacrificing the global receptive field, this modi-
fication reduced the complexity toO(Tw)and offered an effi-
ciency for modeling local interactions.
Recently, SSMs have emerged as a compelling alternative,
offering a robust model for sequence data grounded by the
continuous-time dynamical system. These models characterize
the evolution of latent stateh(t)given an input signalu(t)at
timetthrough a linear ordinary differential equation
dh(t)
dt =Ah(t) +Bu(t),y(t) =Ch(t) +Du(t)(1)
whereA,B,C,Ddenote the system matrices governing the dy-
namics. For discrete-time sequences, this system is discretized
7195
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1708
with a time-step∆for updateh t−1→h t, yielding a standard
recurrent formulation [21]
ht =Ah t−1 +Bu t,y t =Ch t +Du t.(2)
The early model using SSMs was pioneered by the HiPPO
framework [9]. Building on this foundation, the structured
state space model [10] rendered SSM to be practical for long-
sequence modeling by imposing specific structures onAmatrix,
which enabled an efficient convolutional representation. Subse-
quent advancements [22–24] refined these models by introduc-
ing the simplified matrix structures and efficient parallel com-
putation schemes, solidifying their strengths in modeling long-
range dependencies with sub-quadratic complexity.
A pivotal shift in developing SSMs occurred with Mamba
[11, 25], which introduced a selection mechanism by render-
ing the SSM parameters to be input-dependent. This innovation
allows Mamba to selectively propagate or forget information
based on inputu t, transforming the discrete-time state-space
update into a dynamic systemf ssm(A,B,C,u)written as
ht =A(u t)ht−1 +B(u t)ut,y t =C(u t)ht. (3)
This input-dependency inA,B,C, however, breaks the time-
invariance required for conventional convolutional represen-
tations. To overcome this challenge, Mamba employed a
hardware-aware parallel scan algorithm. This design enabled
linear-time scaling and established Mamba and its successors,
such as Mamba2 [12, 26], as the architectures with high ef-
ficiency and performance that presented a useful solution to
quadratic complexity challenges inherent in the transformer.
3. Attentive State Space Model
This paper introduces the attentive Mamba block to enrich stan-
dard Mamba architecture. The core modification lies in sub-
stituting its static local feature aggregation by a depth-wise
convolution with a dynamic, content-aware channel-wise lo-
cal feature attention. The motivation for this architectural shift
originates from an analysis of inherent trade-offs betweencon-
volutionandattention. While convolution excels at efficient
and localized pattern detection through the fixed kernels, it
lacks the dynamic adaptability that self-attention [27, 28] af-
fords for content-specific feature aggregation [29, 30]. This pa-
per presents the theoretical rationale for this substitution, fol-
lowed by a detailed description of the module’s implementation.
Figure 1:Attentive Mamba (right) replaces the convolution
layer of Mamba2 (left) by a channel-wise self-attention layer.
3.1. From Convolution to Attention
The selective mechanism in Mamba architecture predicates
upon generating the state-space parametersA,B,Cdynami-
Figure 2:Generating queriesq, keyskand valuesvby using
(a) time-wise attention, which employs a linear projection in-
dependently on each input token vector at each timet, and (b)
channel-wise attention, which utilizes independent causal con-
volutions for each channel or dimension, embedding local tem-
poral patterns into channel-wise scannedq,kandv. Notation
Cin Figure 1 denotes a SSM parameter whileCin Figure 2
denotes the number of channels.
cally from static inputu t given by time samplex t. In the stan-
dard Mamba2 block (Figure 1, left), this is achieved by first
processing the input sequence with a causal depth-wise con-
volution to produce a local context summary. This summary
is passed through a linear projection to derive SSM parame-
ters. While the parameters of this projection, along with the
other learnable components like input, residual and output pro-
jections (collectively denoted asϕ), are adapted during train-
ing, the core convolutional aggregator itself remains inherently
content-agnostic. Its fixed kernel runs a transformation to lo-
cal patterns irrespective of their broader contextual significance,
providing a static, translation-equivariant summary of the local
history of sequence data [31, 32].
This paper hypothesizes that the model’s expressiveness
can be enhanced by rendering the content-aware local aggre-
gation. Accordingly, the static convolutional aggregation in
Mamba2 is replaced with a channel-wise self-attention, as il-
lustrated in Figure 1 (right). While both convolution and at-
tention operate on a constrained receptive field, their core in-
ductive biases diverge considerably. Convolution employs a set
of static and learnable weights as the kernel for feature aggrega-
tion, whereas self-attention computes the dynamic and instance-
specific weights based on the token-wise similarities within lo-
cal window. This replacement facilitates an adaptive parame-
terization of SSM’s state transitions, allowing the proposed at-
tentive Mamba block to dynamically adjust the importance of
local features. This leads to reliable text generation from the
expressive and powerful acoustic representations.
3.2. Causal Convolutional Channel-Wise Self-Attention
The proposed attention mechanism is architecturally designed
to performdynamicfeature aggregation through a synergis-
tic interplay between two distinct operations. The first oper-
ation involves a contextualized projection stage, which con-
stitutes a significant difference from time-wise self-attention
that utilizes simple linear projections. As illustrated in Fig-
ure 2(b), we employ individual causal channel-wise convolu-
tions to generate the row-wise queriesq c, keysk c, and val-
uesv c. This process is governed by a set of learnable parame-
ters,θ={W q,W k,W v}, where eachW∈R C×w represents
7196
a convolutional kernel with window sizewunderCchannels
or dimensions. This design ensures that the resulting columns
q,k, andvattare contextualized by a local temporal win-
dow, rather than being obtained from a single tokenx t. The
causal convolution using input matrixX={x t,c}consisting
of columnsx t or equivalently rowsx c is then calculated by
st,c =
w−1X
i=0
W s
c,ixt−i,c fors∈{q,k,v}(4)
which acquires the channel-wise rowss c usingW s ={w s
c}
wheres∈{q,k,v}. Subsequently, across-channelattention is
operated to characterize the interactions across overall feature
dimensions. This operation contrasts with standard time-wise
self-attention without causality in transformer, as shown in Fig-
ure 2(a), where attention is computed independently within the
partitioned channel-wise subspaces. Here, the query at time
steptattends exclusively to keys within a recent causal win-
dow of widthw. The dot product between full-dimensionalq t
andk j produces a single scalar attention score. This score fa-
cilitates the computation of a normalized weight for each value
vectorv j, yielding the attended causal context vectoru t∈R C
ut =
tX
j=t−w+1
exp
 
qt·k j/
√
C

tX
j′=t−w+1
exp
 
qt·k j′/
√
C

vj.(5)
The synergy due to this composite design arises from the in-
terplay between two operations. The initial channel-wise con-
volution captures the specialized temporal features within each
channel, while the subsequent cross-channel attention integrates
them into a systematic and content-aware representation. This
adaptive contextual matrixU={u t,c}from input matrixX
with columnsx t or rowsx c is then leveraged to parameterize
the element-wise SSM recurrence for timetand channelcas
ht,c =A(u t,c)ht−1,c +B(u t,c)ut,c, yt,c =C(u t,c)ht,c.
(6)
The attentive Mamba is fully differentiable for end-to-end train-
ing. The parameters comprise those of channel-wise attention
θ={W q,W k,W v}and Mamba projectionϕ. These pa-
rameters are jointly optimized via backpropagation along two
parallel decoding pathways where the nonautoregressive way
based on connectionist temporal classification (CTC) lossL ctc
as well as the autoregressive way based on traditional cross-
entropy lossL aed via attention-based encoder-decoder (AED)
[4] for high-fidelity text generation are minimized with respect
to attention and Mamba parameters{θ,ϕ}under Eqs. (4)(5)(6).
The trained model allows the attention aggregators and the SSM
components to co-adapt for an effective interplay betweendy-
namic local feature extractionandglobal state modeling.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Settings
In the experiments, the attentive Mamba (attMamba) was aug-
mented with channel-wise attention layer to form an encoder,
which was combined with CTC [33, 34] for an end-to-end
ASR. The resulting attMamba-CTC was compared with the
conformer-CTC where the encoder was replaced by a strong
baseline conformer [35]. Mamba2 [12] with convolution layer
was also compared. All models were trained on the 960-hour
read speech in LibriSpeech [36, 37] corpus and evaluated on
Table 1:Summary of configurations and hyperparameters.
Small Model (S) Large Model (L)
Hyperparameter conformer attMamba conformer attMamba
Enc. Layers 18 18 18 18
Model Hidden Dim 256 256 512 512
Expansion Factor 4 2 4 2
Attn. Heads 4 N/A 8 N/A
Conv. Kernel Size 31 N/A 31 N/A
SSM Dim (N) N/A 64 N/A 64
Attn. Window (w) N/A 4 N/A 4
Dropout 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
the dev-clean, dev-other, test-clean, and test-other. In addition,
TED-LIUM v3 dataset [38] of spontaneous speech was used to
train on its 450-hour set and evaluate on its dev and test splits.
The input audio was sampled at 16 kHz. The 80-dimensional
log-Mel filterbank features were extracted with a 25 ms window
and a 10 ms frame shift. A 2-layer 2D convolutional network
with a stride 2 in each layer was used for initial subsampling
of feature sequence. Performance was evaluated by using word
error rate (WER). Parameter size in millions was compared. By
referring the prior works [39–41], the proposed attMamba was
implemented with a bidirectional architecture to leverage the
full temporal context. To ensure a fair comparison, both mod-
els were configured to have comparable model size, with the
configurations of small and large models as shown in Table 1.
Table 2:WERs (%) on LibriSpeech using different encoders.
Best results are shown in bold.
Configuration #Params Dev Set Test Set
(M) clean other clean other
conformer-CTC (S) 30.0 6.51 12.38 6.59 12.57
attMamba-CTC (S)21.2 6.12 12.17 6.24 12.31
Table 3:WERs (%) on TED-LIUM using different encoders
with/without external LM in CTC or CTC+AED.
Configuration #Params (M) Dev Set Test Set
conformer-CTC (S) 30.0 9.42 9.81
attMamba-CTC (S)21.28.53 8.73
attMamba+lm-CTC+AED (S) 23.46.03 6.23
conformer-CTC (L) 78.9 7.90 8.22
attMamba-CTC (L)61.36.76 6.88
attMamba+lm-CTC+AED (L) 65.14.80 4.98
4.2. Experimental Results
The results on two tasks, in Tables 2 and 3, indicate that at-
tentive Mamba offers a competitive alternative to the strong
conformer. WERs of Mamba and attMamba are consistently
lower than those of conformer. Such a finding is similar to that
in [39, 42]. Notably, on the LibriSpeech task, the attMamba
demonstrates a consistent advantage on clean subsets, while
maintaining comparable performance on the more acoustically
challenging other subsets. The model’s strengths are also under-
scored on TED-LIUM v3 dataset, fitted to evaluate long-form
ASR, where attMamba outperforms conformer across all eval-
uation metrics, confirming its robust generalization to different
speech domains. Number of parameters is even substantially
decreased by using attMamba. The evaluation on large model
(L) significantly decreases WER while attMamba performs bet-
ter than conformer. These findings illustrate that integrating a
7197
dynamic channel-wise local attention within SSM is an effec-
tive approach, yielding a powerful and compact architecture.
Table 4:Ablation study on various components in attMamba.
Configuration #Params Dev Set Test Set
(M) clean other clean other
Mamba2 (Baseline)18.79.73 22.37 9.85 22.89
+ Bidirectional 18.7 6.35 15.92 6.53 15.69
+ Chann. Att. (attMamba) 21.26.12 12.17 6.24 12.31
The ablation study presented in Table 4 demonstrates that
the performance of attMamba originates from the contributions
due to its key components. Notably, the introduction of a
bidirectional architecture in attMamba relative to unidirectional
Mamba2 yields a significant improvement in WER, confirming
the critical role of leveraging full temporal context for ASR.
Building upon this, the subsequent replacement of the static
convolutional kernel with our dynamic channel-wise attention
provides a further consistent enhancement across all test con-
ditions. This second step validates that content-aware feature
aggregation offers a dynamic, contextual and expressive repre-
sentation than its static counterpart. These findings illustrate
that both bidirectionality and convolutional channel-wise atten-
tion are crucial complementary components, leading to superior
performance of using attMamba.
Table 5:Comparison and ablation on LibriSpeech using dif-
ferent encoders in an advanced setting where the external LM
rescoring is combined with the joint decoding via CTC+AED.
Configuration #Params Test Set
(M) clean other
wav2vec 95 6.13 13.34
wav2vec+lm 110 3.44 8.03
HuBERT 95 6.26 13.17
HuBERT+lm 110 3.40 8.14
WavLM 95 5.78 12.04
WavLM+lm 110 3.36 7.73
conformer 100 5.15 10.92
conformer+lm 118 3.03 7.15
Mamba2 95 7.32 14.73
+ Bidirectional 95 5.93 12.36
+ Chann. Att. (attMamba) 95 4.02 10.01
+ LM Rs. (attMamba+lm) 1002.73 6.02
The results in previous tables are carried out under a pure
CTC decoding with lossL ctc to evaluate the WER perfor-
mance caused by different encoders. Table 5 further con-
ducts the comparison and ablation under an advanced setting
for test-clean and test-other on LibriSpeech with two-stage de-
coding where an AED [4] is merged to implement CTC+AED
by combining the autoregressive attention lossL aed with CTC
lossL ctc [43] and an external language model (LM) rescoring
based on 4-grams is performed by adding the LM lossL lm due
to the generated sequence throughN-best rescoring scheme
withN= 50. The hybrid loss is empirically combined as
0.3Lctc + 0.5Laed + 0.2Llm for optimization in model training.
For comparative study, the results of encoders using wav2vec-
base [44], HuBERT-base [45] and WavLM-base [46] with and
without LM rescoring are included. Some findings are summa-
rized under CTC+AED with base model. First, post-decoding
via 4-gram rescording (+lm) significantly reduce WERs for var-
ious encoders with the increased model size. Second, although
conformer potentially reduces WERs relative to wav2vec, Hu-
BERT and WavLM, the lowest WERs of test-clean and test-
other are achieved as 2.73% and 6.02% by using the proposed
attMamba+lm, respectively, where the model size is relatively
reduced. The improvements due to channel-wise attention in
attMamba are clear as shown in ablation study. The reduction
of WER due to the incorporation of CTC+AED with LM rescor-
ing via 4-gram is also observed in the evaluation of long-form
ASR by using TED-LIUM 3 as shown in Table 3.
Figure 3:Visualization of feature maps of input (left), output af-
ter Mamba2 (center), and output after attMamba (right) where
channel-wise attention produces more uniformity along hori-
zontal time axis for individual vertical channels.
Figure 3 visually contrasts the effect of using Mamba2 and
attMamba on an input feature map. The input displays consider-
able variance across both time and feature horizons. The output
of channel-wise attention demonstrates substantially increased
uniformity along time for each channel. This indicates that lo-
cal attention does uniformly capture temporal statistics to re-
calibrate the entire channel, thereby contextually emphasizing
channel-wise properties over temporal variations. Conversely,
the convolution layer, while operating on a local temporal re-
ceptive field, simply applies a static and shared kernelwith-
outself-attention. This comparison underscores their distinct
roles, namely channel-wise local attention performs dynamic
and content-dependentchannel modulation, whereas convolu-
tion only executes static and translation-equivariantfeature ex-
traction. AttMamba potentially captures richer sequence infor-
mation than Mamba2.
Overall, the proposed attMamba is not a simple integra-
tion of existing modules, but a targeted solution to an under-
explored bottleneck in time-mixing machine based on Mamba,
suffering from the weakness of content-agnostic nature in a
static convolutional aggregation. We deal with this weakness
through a specialized channel-wise local attention mechanism
where the queries, keys and values are contextualized via the
causal depth-wise convolutions. This design is tailored to cap-
ture the channel-wise coherent patterns in speech spectrograms.
Our ablation study confirms that this specific architecture treat-
ment does improve the performance, due to specialized solution
to combine dynamic local attention and global state modeling.
5. Conclusions
This paper presented the attentive state-space model as a two-
way encoding architecture where the channel-wise and locally
self-attended features were extracted to capture dynamic, con-
textual, consistent and channel-aware inputs to feed in state-
space model, which acted as the time-mixing machine for
global representation. The resulting Mamba with channel-wise
local attention was proposed as a strong encoder block relative
to the conformer based on transformer block and the Mamba2
driven by a simple convolutional block. The experiments on
LibriSpeech and TED-LIUM consistently validates that atten-
tive Mamba substantially obtains lower WERs than conformer
and convolutional Mamba even with a smaller model size.
7198
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
We use generative AI tools to assist with language editing (e.g.
polishing phrasing, improving clarity, and correcting grammar)
during manuscript preparation. All technical content, experi-
mental design, results, and conclusions are produced by the au-
thors, who take full responsibility for the paper. No generative
AI tool is listed as an author, and the tool is not used to generate
a portion of the manuscript.