Effects of Listener Language Experience, Masker Language, and Cognitive 
Load on Word Monitoring Accuracy and Response Time 
Jessica L. L Chin **, Laurence Bruggeman , Mark Antoniou  
The MARCS Institute, Western Sydney University, Australia 
j.chin@westernsydney.edu.au, m.antoniou@westernsydney.edu.au  
 
Abstract 
Speech recognition in competing masker speech can be 
influenced by the similarity between the target and masker 
languages, and the listener’s familiarity with them. Generally, 
recognition is more difficult when the target and masker are 
identical or similar languages. While greater familiarity with 
the target language is beneficial, familiarity with the masker can 
be detrimental. In this study, Australian English monolinguals 
and Arabic –English bil inguals completed an English word 
monitoring task presented with different masker languages. The 
English masker led to the poorest accuracy and response times, 
but there was no evidence that the degree of typological 
similarity between the target and maske r also affected word 
monitoring. The Arabic–English bilinguals, while slower, were 
not less accurate than the monolinguals, nor were they hindered 
by the Arabic masker. Cognitive load, which was manipulated 
by a digit preload secondary task, did not seem to affect word 
monitoring outcomes.  
Index Terms : speech -in-speech recognition, linguistic 
similarity hypothesis, language experience, cognitive load 
1. Introduction 
Human speech recognition in the presence of competing masker 
speech can be difficult due to a  variety of factors pertaining to 
the target and masker speech . W hen compared to optimal 
listening conditions  (i.e., clear, fluent speech presented to 
native listeners in quiet ), these factors decrease speech 
recognition accuracy. Energetic masking, for instance, occurs 
when the spectrotemporal overlap between the target and 
masker leads to difficulty in separating the two signals [1], such 
as listening to a conversation in loud traffic (i.e., nonspeech 
noise) or in a crowd. Outside of energetic masking, 
informational masking refers to the other qualities of a masker 
which may inhibit speech recognition  [2], which may include 
the linguistic qualities of the masker speech [3–5].  
One prominent finding in this regard is the linguistic 
similarity hypothesis, which predicts poorer speech recognition 
accuracy when target and masker languages are more similar 
[6]. This effect is most pronounced when the target and masker 
are the same language (such as English -in-English). 
Typological similarities between target and masker languages, 
like rhythmic structure, may also cause difficulties in speech 
recognition. For instance, English speech recognition accuracy 
is poorer in the presence of another stress-timed masker 
language, like Dutch, than in the presence of a syllable -timed 
language (e.g., Mandarin) [4, 7]. However, another study found 
poorer recognition accuracy only when the target and masker 
languages were the same , and there were no significant 
differences in accuracy between maskers that were 
rhythmically similar to or different from the target [3].  
The listener’s familiarity with the target and/or masker 
language can also affect speech recognition outcomes. For 
instance, nonnative listeners of the target language tend to have 
poorer recognition accuracy than native listeners [8, 9]. 
Conversely, familiarity with the masker language can hinder 
speech recognition, though the extent of this effect varies. Late 
Mandarin–English bilinguals listening to English targets in 
Mandarin masker speech  showed poorer speech recognition 
accuracy than monolinguals, who did not understand the 
masker [10]. For early and simultaneous bilinguals, the 
evidence is mixed. Some studies have shown that early and 
simultaneous bilinguals also recognise speech less accurately  
than monolinguals when they are familiar with the masker [11, 
12], while others show that simultaneous bilinguals perform 
comparably to monolinguals [13, 14]. 
The Ease of Language Understanding model factors in the 
role of memory in speech- in-speech recognition and describes 
how target speech is processed via the matching of speech to 
phonological representations stored in long-term memory [15, 
16]. When recognition of the target is impaired (e.g., by a 
masker), working memory is used to resolve inconsistencies 
between the signal and stored representations. The attentional 
demand of listening to a target within a masker can be further 
strained when the listener is placed under high cognitive load 
via a secondary task. In one study, native listeners adapted their 
masked-speech segmentation strategies under high cognitive 
load to focus more on lexical cues, whereas nonnative listeners 
continued to rely on acoustic cues [17].  
In the present study, we investigated the impact of 1) the 
linguistic similarity between the target and masker , 2) the 
listener’s familiarity with the masker language, and 3) cognitive 
load on speech-in -speech recognition. While speech 
recognition is difficult in a matched target –masker language 
condition, even for native listeners, it is still unclear whether 
this stems more from the linguistic similarity of the target and 
masker, or from the listeners’ familiarity with the masker. To 
clarify this, we recr uited monolingual Australian English and 
bilingual Arabic–English participants. They listened to English 
target words in a word sequence presented in either English, 
Swedish, Arabic, or Spanish masker babble. The maskers 
varied in phonetic and rhythmic sim ilarity to the target 
language: English and Swedish are stress -timed with a large 
vowel inventory [18, 19], Spanish is syllable-timed with fewer 
vowels [20], and Arabic is generally classified as stress -timed 
with fewer vowels [21] . Participants were also tasked with 
retaining one or three two-digit numbers (low and high 
cognitive load, respectively) in memory during the main word 
monitoring task. Task design was derived from a previous dual-
task study conducted in quiet which found that increased digit 
preload difficulty led to lower segment monitoring accuracy  
and slower response times [22].  
1239
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2950
We predicted that English word recognition accuracy and 
response times would be poorest in the presence of the English 
masker. The phonetically similar Swedish masker would result 
in poorer recognition than Spanish and Arabic, which are less 
typologically similar to English. However, the Arabic–English 
bilinguals’ familiarity with the Arabic masker would result in 
poorer recognition in Arabic maskers than in Swedish or 
Spanish, and potentially poorer recognition in Arabic maskers  
than their monolingual coun terparts. Finally, high cognitive 
load (i.e., retaining more numbers during digit preload) would 
lead to poorer recognition outcomes for both listener groups. 
2. Method 
2.1. Participants 
Participants were 82 Australian English monolinguals (59 
females, 3 nonbinary participants, 20 males, M age = 25.97, SD 
= 8.19), and 29 Arabic–English bilinguals (25 females, 3 males, 
and one participant who did not disclose their gender; Mage = 
23.91, SD = 8.09). They reported no hearing or uncorrected 
vision impairments, and had no learning, speech, or language 
disorders. All participants reported their listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing proficiency in English (and Arabic for the 
bilinguals). The me an self -rated English proficiency of the 
Australian English monolinguals was 8.67 (SD  = 0.98), out of 
a maximum rating of 9. The Arabic– English bilingual group 
consisted of nine simultaneous bilinguals, 13 Arabic –English 
early sequential bilinguals, and seven English–Arabic early 
sequential bilinguals. Their mean self -rated proficiency in 
English was 8.72 (SD = 0.59) and 7.60 (SD = 1.02) in Arabic.  
2.2. Experiment design 
The experiment was a word monitoring and digit preload dual 
task comprising of 56 trials (14 word sequences × 4 maskers). 
In each trial, one or three two -digit numbers were presented 
visually on screen for participants to memorise, followed by the 
printed target word they were tasked to monitor.  Participants 
then heard a 16-word sequence presented alongside two-talker 
masker babble, pressing the spacebar when they detected  the 
target. At the end of each trial, they were asked to type the 
numbers they saw at the start of the trial. Participants could read 
the printed numbers and targets, and type the numbers, at their 
own pace , pressing the Enter key when ready to proceed.  
Response times were measured in the word monitoring task, 
which were also used to capture participants’ overall accuracy. 
Words were  drawn from a stimulus set of 41 high 
frequency, disyllabic English words  (14 target words and 27 
fillers). They were recorded by a female native speaker of 
Australian English using the carrier phrase, “Say ___ again.” 
Word sequences were presented alongside t wo-talker masker 
babble created from the recordings of eight talkers: two female 
native speakers of Australian English (different speakers from 
the target), Swedish, Modern Standard Arabic, and South 
American Spanish. Sentences from the Synta ctically Normal 
Sentence Test list [23] were used, and were translated from 
English to the other masker languages. The sentences were 
similar in word frequency and syntactic structure, but were 
semantically anomalous, e.g., “The salt dog caused the shoe.”  
All target and masker stimuli were recorded at a sampling rate 
of 44.1 kHz and 16-bit resolution . The Swedish talkers were 
recorded in Sweden in a double -walled, sound-treated booth, 
using a Blue Yeti USB microphone set to cardioid mode.  The 
Spanish and Arabic maskers were recorded in a double-walled, 
sound-treated booth using a Shure SM10A cardioid microphone 
connected to a Roland Duo-Capture EX audio interface. The 
English targets and maskers were recorded with the same 
equipment, but due to COVID-19 restrictions , the masker 
recordings were done in a regular, quiet room.  
Word sequences and masker tracks were created using Praat 
[24]. Each word sequence contained one target word and 15 
filler words presented in a randomised order, with an 
interstimulus interval of 250 ms. Target words never appeared 
in the first or final position of the sequence. Word sequences 
were normalised to 65 dB SPL. The sentences in each masker 
track were presented in random order. We normalised the long-
term average speech spectra of all tracks to minimise the 
spectral differences between masker conditions. Masker 
sentences were set to 70 dB SPL to create a signal-to-noise ratio 
(SNR) of -5 dB, then merged to create one masker babble track 
per language. Masker speech was excised at a random timepoint 
on the track and superimposed onto the word sequence, leaving 
500 ms of babble before and after the sequence onset and offset.  
The secondary task, digit preload, consisted of two-digit 
numbers between 10 and 99 presented visually on the computer 
screen prior to each word monitoring trial. Only one two-digit 
number appeared in the low cognitive load condition, and three 
two-digit numbers in the high cognitive load condition. Due to 
an error, the Arabic and Swedish masker conditions had six low 
and eight high cognitive load trials, while the English and 
Swedish maskers had eight low and six high cognitive load 
trials.  
2.3. Procedure 
Participants were tested remotely using E -Prime Go 1.0 [25]. 
They gave informed consent and completed a language 
background questionnaire online,  and were instructed to 
complete the experiment in a quiet room using a Windows PC 
and their own headphones. Participants completed one practice 
trial presented in quiet, followed by three with a n SNR of +10 
dB in Swedish, Arabic, and Spanish masker speech. 
Participants then completed 56 experimental trials at -5 dB 
SNR. Participants completed all eight conditions (4 masker × 2 
cognitive load). Trials were presented in randomised order.  
3. Results 
Data from participants who did not provide a response to more 
than 50% of trials in either the digit preload or the word 
monitoring task were excluded from analysis, as this indicated 
a failure to follow instructions or technical issues during the 
experiment. This was the case for four monolingual and two 
bilingual participants. All analyses below thus include data 
from 78 monolinguals and 27 bilinguals. 
Data were analysed with Bayesian multilevel models using 
the brms [26] package in R [27, 28] . Bayesian models use 
credibility intervals to establish the equivalent of what would 
be considered a significant effect in frequentist models. Table 1 
summarises the one -sided hypothesis tests for each model, 
though the digit preload model only analysed effects of Listener 
Group and Cognitive Load. These tests compared accuracy and 
response times  between different experimental conditions . 
Additional details on one -sided hypotheses and model results 
are provided in the Supplementary Material 
(InterspeechSupp.zip). Evidence ratios (ER) greater than 19 
indicate strong evidence in favour of a one -sided hypothesis, 
1240
while the posterior probability (PP) represents the percentage 
of samples which fall in the direction of the hypothesis.  
Table 1: Summary of one-sided hypotheses for 
Bayesian models.  
Population-
level effect 
Hypothesis tests 
Australian English monolinguals 
Masker SW > E; SP > E; A > E;  
SP > SW; A > SW; A < SP 
Cognitive Load Low > High 
Arabic–English bilinguals 
Masker SW > E; SP > E; A > E;  
SP > SW; A < SW; A < SP 
Cognitive Load Low > High 
Listener Group Arabic–English < Australian English 
Note: E = English, SW = Swedish, A = Arabic, SP = Spanish . 
A greater than sign (>) expresses better performance between 
conditions, i.e., higher accuracy, faster response time, and vice-
versa for a less than sign (<).  
3.1. Digit preload 
Response accuracy for the digit preload task was analyse d to 
ensure that retaining more numbers had indeed posed a higher 
cognitive load for participants. It was calculated as the 
Levenshtein edit distance between a participant’s response and 
the correct number(s), using the stringdist [29] package in R. 
This measure counts the number of additions, deletions, or 
substitutions required to change a response into the correct 
number sequence. Correct responses require no edits and 
therefore receive a score of 0, while higher Levenshtein 
distances represent less accurate answers.  
Data were analysed using a Bayesian negative binomial 
model. The model included treatment -coded population- level 
effects for Listener Group (Australian English monolinguals 
[reference level], Arabic–English bilinguals) and Cognitive 
Load (Low [reference le vel], High). A by-participant random 
slope was included as a group-level effect. Weakly informative 
priors were chosen for the intercept (normal distribution, mean 
= 0, SD = 5) and predictor slopes (normal distribution, mean = 
0, SD = 2). The number of pos terior draws was set to 8000.  
There was extremely strong evidence that digit preload 
accuracy was lower under high cognitive load (more numbers) 
than low cognitive load (fewer numbers), with an evidence ratio 
(ER) of ≥ 7999.00 and posterior probability (PP) of 1.00. The 
bilinguals were  not any better or worse in this task than the 
monolinguals. 
3.2. Word monitoring  
In the word monitoring task, we measured both accuracy and 
response times (RTs). Button press responses were categorised 
as either successful hits, misses (no response), or false alarms 
(anticipatory responses faster than 200 ms or slower than 2000 
ms after target onset, as well as responses slower than 3 SD  of 
the within-subject mean RT).  
3.2.1. Accuracy (word sensitivity) 
Word monitoring accuracy was analysed using dprime (d′ ), 
which accounts for participants’ sensitivity to a target signal by 
subtracting the Fisher transformation (z) of the hit rate (H) from 
that of the false alarm rate (F) in each of the eight experimental 
conditions, as in formula (1). A positive d′ value indicates better 
performance, while 0 is at-chance performance, and a negative 
value is below chance performance. 
𝑑𝑑′ =  𝑧𝑧(𝐻𝐻) −  𝑧𝑧(𝐹𝐹) (1) 
In cases where H or F equalled 1 or 0, the loglinear rule was 
applied to adjust the values to prevent d′  from returning a 
calculation error [30], using formula (2). x  denotes the H or F 
value requiring adjustment, and n denotes the total number of 
responses in the experimental condition.  
𝐴𝐴𝑑𝑑𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑑𝑑 𝐻𝐻 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝐹𝐹 =  𝑥𝑥 + 0.5 
𝑛𝑛 + 1 (2) 
Figure 1 shows the distribution of responses (violin plot) 
and mean accuracy (dot) across listener groups and 
experimental conditions. A Bayesian skew -normal regression 
model was applied to the data, using the treatment -coded 
population-level effects of Li stener Group (same as digit 
preload), Masker (Australian English [reference level], 
Swedish, Arabic, Spanish), and Cognitive Load (same as digit 
preload). Group-level effects included the random intercepts by 
Word (item) and by-participant random slopes for Listener 
Group. Weakly informati ve priors were used for the intercept 
(normal distribution, mean = 1, SD  = 2), predictor slopes 
(normal distribution, mean = 0, SD  = 5), scale (exponential 
distribution, mean = 1, rate parameter = 1), and skewness 
(normal distribution, mean = 2, SD  = 3). The number of 
posterior draws was set to 12000 to account for the decreased 
number of observations in the eight conditions after calculating 
d′.  
For the monolinguals, there was strong evidence that 
accuracy was higher in the Spanish condition than the English 
(ER = 20.39, PP = 0.95) and Swedish (ER = 199, PP = 1.00) 
conditions, but inconclusive evidence for the other Masker 
hypotheses. Word monitoring accuracy was not affected by 
manipulations to cognitive load. These outcomes were similar 
for the bilinguals, where there was only strong evidence that 
accuracy was higher in the Spanish condition than in English 
(ER = 26.03, PP = 0.96). Both listener groups performed 
similarly in this task, as there was insufficient evidence to 
suggest differences in accuracy between groups.  
 
 
Figure 1: Word monitoring accuracy (d′) by Masker 
and Cognitive Load conditions, faceted by Listener 
Group. 
1241
3.2.2. Response time 
Figure 2 shows the distribution of responses (violin plot) and 
mean RTs (dot) across listener groups and experimental 
conditions. Word monitoring RTs for successful hits were 
analysed using a Bayesian lognormal regression model with the 
same treatment- coded population-effects of Listener Group, 
Masker, and Cognitive Load as the previous model for word 
monitoring accuracy. The group-level effects were the random 
intercepts by Word and by-participant random slopes for 
Listener Group. Weakly informative priors were chosen for the 
intercept (normal distribution, mean = 0, SD  = 1), predictor 
slopes (normal distribution, mean = 0, SD  = 1), and scale 
(exponential distribution, rate parameter = 1).  
 
 
Figure 2: Word monitoring RTs by Masker and 
Cognitive Load conditions, faceted by Listener Group. 
There was strong evidence that the monolinguals were 
faster in the Swedish and Arabic conditions than in English 
(both ERs ≥ 7999.00, PPs = 1.00), but no evidence that RTs 
were faster in the Spanish condition than in English. There was 
also no evidence that the Swedish, Arabic, or Spanish masker 
conditions differed in RT, nor was there evidence of a cognitive 
load effect. Interestingly, two hypothesis tests returned ERs and 
PPs of 0.00 (i.e., faster RTs for Spanish vs. Swedish; slower 
RTs for Arabic vs. Spanish), which may suggest stronger 
evidence in favour of the opposite direction of the hypothesis.  
The bilinguals showed faste r RTs for the Swedish (ER = 
7999.00, PP = 1.00), Arabic (ER = 1999.00, PP. 1.00), and 
Spanish (ER = 40.03, PP = 0.98) conditions compared to the 
English condition. Unlike our predictions, their RTs were not 
any slower in the Arabic condition than in Swedish or Spanish, 
and there were also no observable cognitive load effects. 
However, there was strong evidence that bilinguals showed 
slower word monitoring RTs overall compared to monolinguals 
(ER = 26.12, PP = 0.96).  
4. Discussion 
The current study found that, for both Australian English 
monolinguals and Arabic –English bilinguals, English target 
word monitoring accuracy  was poorer in the presence of 
English masker speech compared to Spanish. Word monitoring 
RTs in the English masker condition were slower than the 
Swedish and Arabic conditions for the monolinguals, and 
slower than all other language maskers for the bilinguals. These 
findings are consistent with other studies in the literature that 
showed greater difficulty in target recognition when the masker 
is in the same language [3, 4, 6]. One thing to note is that, while 
RTs were more adversely affected when the masker was in 
English, this did not always correspond with lower word 
monitoring accuracy in the same conditions.  
On the other hand, the level of typological similarity 
between the target and masker language did not affect target 
speech recognition, as shown by the lack of evidence in the 
models’ one -sided hypothesis tests. The Swedish masker 
condition, though more phonetically and rhythmically similar 
to English, did not result in lower accuracy or slower RTs than 
the Arabic or Spanish conditions. The one exception is the 
evidence showing higher word monitoring accuracy in the 
Spanish condition than in Swedish for monolinguals. The 
findings otherwise reflect past research which found that a 
masker that was more rhythmically similar to the target was not 
any more detrimental to speech recognition than a rhythmically 
dissimilar one [3]. A limitation of the one-sided hypothesis tests 
is the possibility that the evidence could lend greater support 
towards the opposite direction tested, as shown in the 
hypothesis tests which returned ERs and PPs of 0.00. It is 
possible that, for the monoli nguals, RTs were faster in the 
Swedish condition than in Spanish, and slower in Spanish than 
in Arabic. Th e above hypotheses were not tested, as they  did 
not align with our predictions for target–masker similarity. 
When comparing word recognition outcomes between the 
two listener groups, the bilinguals were slower than the 
monolinguals, but both groups showed comparable accuracy 
scores. Listener familiarity did not appear to have an effect for 
the bilinguals, who did not show lower accuracy or slower RTs 
in the Arabic masker condition than in Spanish or Swedish. It 
is possible that they  were adequately proficient in both 
languages, so their English recognition was not hindered by the 
Arabic masker, as shown in previous studies with simultaneous 
bilinguals [13, 14]. Alternatively, this finding might be 
attributed to the difficulty of the word monitoring task, which 
is not as arduous as the more commonly-used sentence 
recognition paradigm [3–6]. 
Although previous research found poorer monitoring 
accuracy and response times under high cognitive load [22], 
both listener groups in the current study were less accurate in  
digit preload under high cognitive load, but their word 
monitoring accuracy and response times were not affected by 
cognitive load. It is possible that, when presented with a longer 
number sequence, participants opted not to retain the numbers 
and instead focused on the main task, resulting in lower digit 
preload accuracy under high cognitive load, but unhindered 
word monitoring performance.  
In sum, speech-in-speech recognition is most difficult when 
the target and masker are in th