Sorting Clusters into the Shape of the Word: Positional Distribution of
Probabilities
Anastasia Chuprina ID 1
1 University of Cambridge, the United Kingdom
ac2779@cam.ac.uk
Abstract
The study investigates the structure of a phonologically com-
plex phenomenon and its positional organisation in early child
speech. We provide an analysis of the transcriptions of child’s
actual speech along with its idealised variant and use entropy
measured per consonant clusters’ position within the word –ini-
tial, intervocalic and final. While the model structure displays
stable tripartite positional differentiation, child’s actual produc-
tion shows greater cross-linguistic instability and weaker word
edge contrasts. We also observe a positional asymmetry, me-
dial clusters exhibiting the highest entropy across languages.
Entropy in the model subsystem increases with age and vocab-
ulary, whereas in the actual subsystem remains comparatively
unchanged with regard to the chronological age. Higher entropy
observed in the actual productions converges into the model
state guided by the vocabulary while the syntactic complexity
may selectively slow down acquisition of phonological com-
plexity.
Index Terms: speech development, positional segmentation,
consonant clusters, system stability
1. Introduction
This study examines the learning of a complex task of speech
production exemplified by sequences of consonants produced
in three positions within a word. Theoretical bases are a theory
of initial constraint relaxation at the level of the motor control
during learning and theory of statistical learning at the level of
language system.
1.1. Variation in learner system
Many species who are not necessarily vocal learners show grad-
ual adaptation to the species-specific patterns of communication
(e.g. humans and songbirds [1, 2, 3, 4], chimpanzees [5]). Fol-
lowing Nikolai Bernstein’s model of probabilistic learning of a
complex motor task [6], a greater diversity in the performance
is the result of the temporarily relaxed constraints, which gives
additional degrees of freedom to the learner. It was shown, for
example, in rock climbing that adult climbers’ entropy of tra-
jectory diminished as a function of the trial order number and
the level of expertise [7]. Although measured at microscopic
level through the inventories of the elements, oral motor devel-
opment shows a similar pathway, exhibiting initial variation in
infant behaviour, i.e. exploration stage, which gradually starts
to serve adaptative and efficient activity limiting the motoric
repertoire [8].
Throughout the stages of vocal learning, both birds and hu-
mans reveal a similar trajectory: The initial variation in songs
is followed by selective attrition of the repertoire [2] and hu-
man infants from different language backgrounds exhibit re-
duction in phonetic structure during transition from babbling to
first words in response to the structure of their native language
[9, 10, 11].
1.2. Acoustic positional structure
The precise mechanisms underlying emergent structure in the
vocal repertoire are the focus of biomechanics, oscillatory dy-
namics and statistical learning and are at heart of speech seg-
mentation technology [12, 13]. Biomechanical constraints are
known to underlie sequence organisation, including cyclical jaw
and lip movements that produce consonant–vowel (CV) alter-
nations, the most fundamental syllable across all languages and
the earliest one emerging in infant speech [14]. Across vari-
ous sound systems –speech, song, and music, the sequences of
such cycles manifest themselves through oscillations in dura-
tion, pitch, and amplitude. In relevance to our study, the po-
sitional structure of the sequence has its specific acoustic cor-
relations: Utterances or syllables at sequence edges tend to be
longer, lower in pitch, and louder [15, 16, 17, 18]. Furthermore,
elements occupying different positions within a sequence might
be differentially encoded and recalled by the nervous system
[19].
In language acquisition, sensitivity to such oscillations
guides natural and artificial language learning in young [1, 20,
21] and old [22] subjects.
1.3. Phonotactics and consonant cluster production
Consonant clusters are an appropriate material for studying
the development of a constraint-governed system. We opera-
tionalise them as sequences of adjacent consonants. Clusters
are observed in languages with complex syllabic structure and
their composition is governed through phonotactic constraints.
Phonotactic organisation is not only specified horizontally as
the sequence of allowed phonemes but is further restricted po-
sitionally ([23]), e.g. English does not allow sequences such as
dborktat the onset of words. It has been shown that such struc-
ture is one of the information sources used by speakers in tasks
on word segmentation [24, 20, 13]. In addition, it is through
clusters that morphological organisation might further differen-
tiate the phonological system, giving rise to morphophonologi-
cal clusters at the morpheme boundary [25].
Mastery of consonant cluster production develops slowly
[26] but positional effects can be observed from early on both
in regard to timing and accuracy of production: They can be first
observed in a medial position as in Polish [27])and they can be
most accurate in the initial position while being vulnerable to
cross-linguistic influence in the final position [26].
In this study, we follow speech production of a develop-
581
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3400
ing child along two dimensions: the immature motor control
subsystem and the well-structured phonotactically constrained
subsystem of the native language. The former one produces
varied cluster types for the same word (e.g. Englishstandingis
produced as [dændi,stænI,stæmdi,TtandIn]) while the latter sub-
system not only reduces the possibility of particular clusters in
a language but further restricts them per position. There will
be little surprise if we see the first subsystem characterised by
higher entropy and the other one by lower values. What we do
not know is whether the positional structure can be captured in
child productions given the uncertainty of the developing sys-
tem.
2. Materials & Methods
This study draws on longitudinal child speech corpora to exam-
ine the development of a phonologically complex phenomenon
across languages. We analysed actual child speech and its adult-
like or model idealisation to compare how stable cluster dis-
tribution is across the positions within a word in multiple lan-
guages.
2.1. Data Sample
The data were sourced from CHILDES database (version
2021.1, [28]), using R librarychildesr[29]. Only the corpora
that contained IPA-formatted phonetic transcriptions of both
child’s utterances, e.g.he’s green[his gwin]and its model vari-
ant[hiz gôi:n]were included. The data were taken from children
with two or more recording sessions.
Each of the six languages of the dataset (See Table 1)
([30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41]) –English (Amer-
ican and British varieties), French (Canadian and European),
Portuguese (European), Dutch, German, and Polish– has its dis-
tinctive phonotactic profile [42]. Importantly, all languages in
this pool allow for complex syllable structure.
Table 1:Sample description
Language N
chil-
dren
Age
Range in
Months
Mean (sd) Ses-
sion Length in
Word Tokens
English 13 8–48 3944 (3015)
French 7 12–52 2721 (2107)
Portuguese 5 8–58 1205 (484)
Dutch 12 13–35 529 (299)
German 4 12–25 823 (409)
Polish 4 19–38 938 (254)
2.2. Preprocessing
Before searching for clusters, a custom-made algorithm in
Python programming language cleared the transcriptions off the
diacritics in order to account for the phonemic inventory in-
stead of gradient vocal production. Then it recorded conso-
nantal combinations in word-onset, intervocalic, and word-final
positions. A vocalic element was coarsely defined as a single
vowel or a combination of adjacent vowels. The clusters that
did not abide by consonant-consonant composition such as a
combination with glides (e.g.mjorkw) or co-articulated con-
sonants instead of a sequence of two or more consonants (e.g.>tp) were excluded as well as clusters produced in isolation.
The dataset was limited to the words of up to four-syllable
length, based on the number of the vocalic elements in a word,
which comprised>95%of child productions and>97%in
adultlike system, with 1-syllable words accounting for>50%
of the sample. Medial position was assigned to all intervocalic
clusters with no regard to the word token length. The majority
of clusters consisted of two consonants (>90%of all clusters)
in both subsystems, actual and model phonologies 1.
Table 2:Actual and model, or adultlike, cluster production: to-
tal and unique cluster counts by language
Language Actual
N
Clus-
ters
Actual
Unique
Clus-
ters
Model
N
Clus-
ters
Model
Unique
Clus-
ters
English 54843 1466 75487 397
French 10738 478 15410 153
Portuguese 2308 244 5933 64
Dutch 5019 458 9850 273
German 1923 264 3425 234
Polish 4223 379 5486 239
Table 2 provides the overall token and type distributions of
consonant clusters across languages, the size and distribution
of which entropy is sensitive to. To obtain size-unbiased en-
tropy estimations, the clusters were binned into50-cluster long
lists per position per child to ensure comparability of informa-
tion content. This way each child had a series of equally-sized
bins of clusters with no respect to the amount and duration of
the recording sessions. The size of bins was also chosen prag-
matically: The rate of cluster production per position per child
cumulatively throughout the sessions in a given month had a
median of16–31and a mean of33–64clusters. Thus, a bin
size of50captures enough data to compute reliable entropy es-
timates and to align well with the actual production of clusters.
We also calculated proxy measures for vocabulary and syn-
tax. In the absence of word lemma annotations, the vocabulary
was measured based on the number of unique word forms pro-
duced in a given month, which then was averaged per bin. Sim-
ilarly, the mean length of the utterance, MLU (in tokens), was
calculated as a measure of syntactic complexity.
2.3. Diversity estimation
The entropy was estimated using the R packageentropy[43].
The literature mentions a variety of methods [44], [45]. We
used four bias-corrected estimators: Dirichlet–Jeffreys [46],
Dirichlet–Sch¨urmann–Grassberger [47], Miller–Madow [48],
and Chao–Shen [49]. All measures were highly correlated
(Pearsonr > .94,p < .001), indicating that relative dif-
ferences between the subsystems were robust to the estimator
choice (See Supplementary material). We report results based
on the Sch ¨urmann–Grassberger Dirichlet estimator, which has
previously been applied to phoneme and phonological distribu-
tions in child speech [50]. It provides alphabet-size–dependent
smoothing appropriate for moderately sparse categorical data.
By contrast, the Chao–Shen estimator, deemed as the most reli-
able one [51], is more commonly used for word-level distribu-
tions with a large number of unseen categories. We modelled
1The detailed descriptive statistics and more supplementary mate-
rial, including the dataset, can be found on Open Science Network
(OSF) at https://osf.io/v6uc7/overview.
582
the entropy using both, the Dirichlet–Sch ¨urmann–Grassberger
and Chao-Shen estimators. The main pattern of results was con-
sistent across both of them.
2.4. Analyses
All analyses were conducted in R [52]. The response variable,
entropy, represents the amount of information in bits in clus-
ter distribution for each position. We fitted linear mixed-effects
models (R packagelme4, [53] in two steps: First, cluster di-
versity was measured as a function of language, position and
their interaction, as well as of age, vocabulary and syntax sep-
arately in actual and in model datasets; then, convergence be-
tween the two subsystems within the observed period was mod-
elled, using the difference between the actual and model struc-
tures (D=H adult −H child). Age, vocabulary and syntax were
included into the model.
Interactions between position and language were included
only for the languages with the data in all three positions. Each
model included random intercepts and random slopes for lo-
quacity by child. This captures between-child variability and
talkativeness in a recording session. While entropy was cal-
culated on fixed-size bins, the mean age of each bin was used
as the predictor in the model. Continuous predictors (age,
loquacity, unique word count, and MLU) were standardized
(mean=0, SD=1). Tukey post hoc tests via R packageemmeans
[54] were used in the case of significance of the main effects in
the model.
The structure of random effects in the final model was cho-
sen on the basis of likelihood-ratio tests (χ 2) and AIC compar-
isons [55]. Residual diagnostics was performed to assess linear-
ity and homoscedasticity, and to check for model misspecifica-
tion. R packageggplot2[56] was used to generate figures.
3. Results
We will evaluate the results separately for the actual or child
3.1 and model or adultlike datasets 3.2 and for the convergence
between the two subsystems 3.3.
3.1. Actual subsystem
A linear mixed-effects model revealed robust positional and
cross-linguistic effects on entropy. The medial position con-
sistently exhibited higher diversity relative to both, the initial
(p < .001) and final positions (p < .0001), while entropy in
final position was lower than in initial (p < .001), reflecting
greater intervocalic variability and word edge stabilisation.
The main cross-linguistic contrasts were driven by Pol-
ish, which exhibited significantly higher cluster diversity than
Dutch, English, French and Portuguese (all Tukey-adjusted
p<.05).
Significant position-by-language interactions indicate that
positional asymmetries vary systematically across languages.
In Dutch, English, French, and German, the medial position
showed significantly greater entropy than both edge positions.
In Polish, medial position exceeded the final only (p=.02).
English was the only language in which the final position
showed higher entropy than the initial position (p < .0001)
(see Figure 1) and Portuguese –the only language with the ini-
tial position exhibiting the highest entropy of the three positions
(p<.01).
While the above patterns were consistent across both en-
tropy estimators, vocabulary size (Est.=−6.3,SE=
2.1,p<.01) and age (Est.=−2.3,SE= 1.2,p=.05) were
adult−like child
DutchEnglishFrenchGermanPolish
Portuguese
DutchEnglishFrenchGermanPolish
Portuguese
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
Language
Estimated Entropy (bits)
Position
Initial
Medial
Final
Figure 1:Estimated entropy (in bits) by cluster position across
languages, separately for the child and the adultlike production
system. Points show the estimated marginal means from linear
mixed-effects models, with error bars representing 95% confi-
dence intervals.
associated with reduced entropy only in the Chao-Shen model,
suggesting stabilization of the system with lexical growth and
overall development. MLU did not yield consistent effects.
Finally, between-child variability was observed, with a
strong positive correlation between individual intercepts and lo-
quacity, indicating that more talkative children tended to exhibit
higher entropy in general.
3.2. Model subsystem
The model of adultlike production exhibited similar positional
and cross-linguistic effects. As in the child model, the medial
position possessed significantly higher entropy than both edges
(p < .0001), and the final position showed reduced entropy
relative to the initial position (p < .001), supporting a strong
positional asymmetry.
Cross-linguistically, Dutch, German and Polish exhibited
significantly higher entropy than English and French (Tukey-
adjustedp < .05). No reliable difference emerged between
Dutch, German and Polish.
Significant interaction between position and language
demonstrated similar asymmetries to the child model. In all
languages, medial position exceeded both edge positions (all
p < .001), although in Portuguese the comparison was only
possible between the medial and initial positions. Language
differences varied within the initial-final pair: In Dutch, French
and Polish final position diversity was below the initial one (all
p < .001) but in English, final position exceeded the initial
(p < .0001), mirroring the pattern observed in the actual pro-
ductions (See the comparison between the two systems in Fig-
ure 1).
Unlike the child-production model, adultlike entropy
showed positive effects of developmental covariates. Age
(Est.= 0.13,SE= 0.02,p < .01) and vocabulary size
(Est.= 0.46,SE= 0.04,p<.01) were both positively asso-
ciated with entropy across both estimators, suggesting increas-
ing diversification of cluster production with linguistic growth
and overall development. MLU showed a modest but robust
negative effect in the Dirichlet–Sch¨urmann–Grassberger model
only (Est.=−0.08,SE= 0.02,p=.001).
583
Initial Medial Final
−2 −1 0 1 2 −2 −1 0 1 2 −2 −1 0 1 2
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
Scaled predictor
Predicted difference (D)
predictor
Age
MLU
Vocabulary
Figure 2:Predicted population-level trajectories of the
adult–child entropy difference (D) as a function of standardized
age, MLU and vocabulary, separately for positions. Shaded
areas indicate95% confidence intervals. Predictions were gen-
erated from the linear mixed-effects model with random effects
set to zero (population-level effects).
The random effects were exactly the same as in the child
model.
3.3. Convergence
In the final model, we were interested in whether convergence
between the two systems takes place within the observed period
of our sample and whether it is different across the word posi-
tions. We subtracted actual entropy from its model values and
used the result in the final step of the analysis.
The intercept was negative but nonsignificant, indicating no
global bias toward either system. No pairwise language dif-
ferences, with the exception of the Dutch–Portuguese contrast,
were significant after Tukey adjustment (p=.009).
Positional effects demonstrated an asymmetry: The medial
position showed a positive effect in comparison with the ini-
tial one (Est.= 0.12,SE= 0.04,p=.002), whereas the
final position showed a negative effect (Est.=−0.16,SE=
0.42,p<.001). This indicates that convergence pathways vary
across the word structure, with a greater actual–model gap in
the final position and the closest proximity in the intervocalic
condition.
Developmental predictors significantly modulated conver-
gence in the Dirichlet–Sch ¨urmann–Grassberger model only.
Both MLU (Est.= 0.13,SE= 0.054,p=.01) and vo-
cabulary size (Est.= 0.16,SE= 0.066,p=.02) were
positively associated with the difference in entropy, indicat-
ing a possibility that increasing linguistic development reduces
the gap between actual and model subsystems. Additionally,
a significant negative interaction of MLU in the final position
(Est.=−0.16,SE= 0.067,p=.017) further suggested
a selective sensitivity to the the syntactic complexity (see Fig-
ure 2).
Between-child variability was modest, and the correlation
between intercept and loquacity was negligible, indicating that
convergence is less driven by talkativeness than the raw entropy
levels.
4. Discussion
This study described the organisation of consonant clus-
ter distributions across word positions in several languages.
Developmentally-constrained or actual child speech was ob-
served along with its model adultlike variant.
Phonological organisation revealed similar patterns in both,
albeit the cluster distributions are most strongly stratified in the
model subsystem whereas the actual speech shows robust dif-
ferentiation between intervocalic and edge positions taken to-
gether. This is in line with the statistical learning mechanisms:
Within the time of our sample, the word boundaries are already
shaped by the young talkers [1] and we see it in the differentia-
tion of the edges from the medial position.
The results on positional stability are in accord with the
observed edge-effect in speech development and language pro-
cessing. Previous studies report earlier production of final clus-
ters [26] as well as the reliance of infant word segmentation on
the statistical properties at the beginning of the sequence both
locally at the word level [57] and globally at the level of ut-
terance [58]. Altogether, this indicates that relative stability of
edge positions makes them more available for production and
the earliest source of learning. Interestingly, their stability does
not seem to be an issue for the intrusion of the odd sound com-
binations and allows them to be a suitable site for testing newly
acquired syllables: It was shown that in zebra finches and in
human babbling newly generated syllable types occur more fre-
quently at utterance edges before gradual integration into inter-
nal positions [59]. Future studies can resolve this curiosity.
Naturally, the languages of the sample do not reach a unan-
imous agreement on their positional organisation. Final posi-
tion in English does not exhibit the stability of its counterpart
in the other languages. This suggests a possible role of the
morphophonotactic constraint [25]. Although the most mor-
phologically complex case in our sample is Polish, its mor-
phophonological changes in consonantal clustering do not per-
tain to the final position but to the right-edge prevocalic loca-
tion. In English, on the contrary, morphological change gives
rise to the phonological complexity in the final position. A
question whether an additional specification for morphology in-
terferes with the purely phonological structure observed in the
corresponding position is left for the future due to the absence
of comparable morphological-level annotations in the corpora
of our sample.
At the same time, our results add a detail linking word seg-
mentation to the earlier stage of whole word template [60]. We
saw that the diversity in the intervocalic location was the clos-
est to the corresponding measure in the unconstrained system,
which might be responsible for a language-compatible phono-
logical stability and result in more effective communication. In
other words, it might be the locus of whole word stability, which
can later allow word segmentation through statistical learning
[1] and syllable-level prosodic organisation [61, 21].
We conclude by emphasising the role of vocabulary as a
driving force in early phonological organisation: It reduces the
uncertainty in the process of learning and raises the phonologi-
cal diversity of speech production.
Our analysis relies on naturalistic corpora drawn from dif-
ferent sources, whose transcription strategies may vary. Al-
though we controlled for individual differences, including lo-
quacity within the session, the findings must be tested using
acoustic measurements in combination with discrete phonolog-
ical units. The current view, limited to consonant cluster pro-
duction, must be extended to a broader range of CV structures
to investigate how the interaction between phonological com-
plexity and its positional distribution within a word influences
the ease or difficulty in speech perception and production.
584
5. Generative AI Use Disclosure
This manuscript was written without the aid of generative AI.
6. References
[1] J. R. Saffran, R. N. Aslin, and E. L. Newport, “Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants,”Science, vol. 274, no.
5294, p. 1926–1928, Dec. 1996. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.274.5294.1926
[2] P. Marler and S. Peters, “Developmental overproduction and
selective attrition: New processes in the epigenesis of birdsong,”
Developmental Psychobiology, vol. 15, no. 4, 