A Large-Scale Dataset of Listener Impressions of Emotional TTS
Erica Cooper1, Xiaoxue Gao2, Takuma Okamoto1, Tomoki Toda3,1, Nancy Chen2, Hisashi Kawai1
1 National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Japan
2 Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
3 Nagoya University, Japan
ecooper@nict.go.jp
Abstract
We present the first large-scale dataset for speech quality as-
sessment of emotional synthesized speech. The dataset con-
sists of 18,208 speech samples in five emotional styles from 13
state-of-the-art synthesis systems and natural emotional speech,
along with ratings from 262 listeners for quality and several as-
pects of emotional content, including perceived emotional cat-
egories, how well the speech matches the target emotion, va-
lence, arousal, and dominance. Analyses of the ratings show
the relationships between the different types of ratings, and ex-
periments using pretrained emotion recognizers, speech qual-
ity predictors, and LLM-as-judge prediction approaches reveal
reasonable correlations with human ratings in some cases, with
room for improvement and varying results observed depending
on the emotion category. This dataset will be made public to
the research community as a resource for the developing auto-
matic speech quality assessment models for emotional synthe-
sized speech.
Index Terms: emotional speech synthesis, speech synthesis
evaluation, speech quality assessment
1. Introduction
Text-to-speech synthesis (TTS) has seen remarkable progress in
recent years. However, far from being a solved problem, TTS is
still an active area of research, especially for more nuanced and
expressive forms of synthesis such as emotional speech, which
is especially important for conversational AI systems.
The gold standard for evaluating synthesized speech is to
conduct listening tests in which human listeners listen to the
audio and give their impressions, with one typical and popu-
lar evaluation paradigm being the Mean Opinion Score (MOS)
test [1]. However, these listening tests are time-consuming and
costly, forming a significant bottleneck on rapid experimental
iteration. This limitation is the motivation forautomatic speech
quality assessment, wherein opinions arepredictedusing ma-
chine learning. Activities such as the V oiceMOS/AudioMOS
Challenge series [2] and the URGENT Challenge [3] have fur-
ther driven research in this area, resulting in pretrained open-
source machine learning models for speech quality prediction,
such as UTMOS [4], which have gained widespread use as
a preliminary objective evaluation metric to guide experimen-
tal choices and hyperparameter selection for speech synthesis
(e.g., [5]), in tandem with listening tests for final evaluation.
Although machine learning based MOS prediction has be-
come a useful tool for researchers, their use case is still ex-
tremely limited – large-scale datasets of synthesized audio and
the corresponding naturalness ratings used for training MOS
predictors, such as BVCC [6] and SOMOS [7], contain sam-
ples from general-purpose, neutral speech synthesis systems,
and opinion prediction models trained on this data are there-
fore not expected to generalize well to other use cases such as
emotional TTS. Furthermore, researchers developing TTS mod-
els for emotional speech not only want to measure naturalness
but also the emotional expressivity and how well it matches the
target emotion. Data is needed to train prediction models that
can handle this use case; however, no such appropriate data ex-
ists – raw listening test results from papers on emotional TTS
are not typically made public, and existing datasets of natural
emotional speech, even ones containing annotations from hu-
man raters such as IEMOCAP [8] and MSP-Podcast [9], do not
contain any synthesized samples and are hence not sufficient for
this use case.
We contribute a large-scale dataset containing both syn-
thesized and natural speech in emotional styles, with ratings
from human listeners for both quality MOS (QMOS) as well
as several aspects of emotional content. We present analysis
of the data and preliminary experiments using existing tools to
determine their capacity to predict these ratings. An existing
state-of-the-art MOS predictor trained on neutral synthesized
speech ranks the quality of the TTS systems with a correlation
of 0.80 to the human ratings, and an LLM-as-judge approach
predicts emotion MOS (EMOS) rankings with a correlation of
0.84; both of these metrics vary substantially depending on the
emotion, demonstrating both room for improvement and more
task-appropriate metrics. The dataset will be made public as
a resource for developing automatic speech quality assessment
models for emotional synthesized speech. In Section 2 we de-
scribe the audio material used in the listening test, Section 3
describes the listening test design, in Section 4 we present the
results of the listening test, and in Section 5 we present the re-
sults of experiments testing the predictive abilities of existing
models on this data.
2. Listening Test Material
We collected and generated samples from 13 different emo-
tional TTS systems and real emotional speech.
2.1. Collected samples
We adopt the English part of the Emotional Speech Dataset
(ESD) [10] as the source of natural emotional speech and input
texts. ESD is a widely used dataset in emotional speech gen-
eration research [10–13], providing parallel, acted emotional
text and speech. The dataset contains five emotion categories,
including Neutral, Happy, Angry, Sad, and Surprise, spoken
by 10 English speakers with balanced gender distribution [10].
Each speaker utters the same set of 350 sentences for each emo-
tion, resulting in 1,750 utterances per speaker (approximately
12 hours in total). We select ESD due to its controlled recording
4265
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1521
conditions, parallel emotional design, and extensive adoption in
prior work, making it well suited for evaluating and comparing
the emotional speech quality of different TTS systems [10–13].
We collected emotional speech samples synthesized from
Emo-DPO and EmoSpeech using the official test splits of ESD
[10, 12]. This test set consists of 30 utterances per emotion
across five emotions and ten speakers, yielding a total of 1,500
utterances.EmoSpeechbuilds upon the FastSpeech2 architec-
ture [14] by introducing a conditioning mechanism that allows
emotions to contribute to each phone with varying intensity
levels [12]. Representing a shift toward more recent genera-
tive modeling,Emo-DPOis a controllable emotional TTS ap-
proach that integrates an emotion-aware LLM-TTS architecture
with direct preference optimization [11], which differentiates
and generates subtle emotional nuances by optimizing for pre-
ferred emotional outputs over less preferred ones.
We further incorporated 74 ground-truth recordings featur-
ing two speakers speaking in Neutral and Happy styles from the
DailyTalk test set [15], alongside their corresponding synthe-
sized speech generated by two state-of-the-art conversational
speech synthesis systems: ECSS [16] and GPT-Talker [17].
ECSSenhances emotional expressiveness through a heteroge-
neous graph-based context modeling mechanism and a con-
trastive learning-based emotion renderer [16].GPT-Talker
achieves naturalness by predicting discrete semantic and style
tokens from multi-turn dialogue history using a GPT-based
framework, which are then synthesized via a conversation-
enriched VITS model [17]. These systems provide a robust
foundation for evaluating high-fidelity emotional rendering and
generative conversational modeling.
Next, we generated samples from open-source and API-
based models that could support synthesis in our five emotions.
To match the conditions of the majority of our collected data,
we synthesized the ESD test sentences. Some systems allowed
voice cloning of ESD speaker identities using reference sam-
ples, while other systems generate speaker identities from a text
prompt or use pre-set ones.
All audio samples were volume-normalized usingsv56 1.
2.2. Synthesis using ESD speaker IDs
EmoKnob[18] extracts emotion representations from the la-
tent space of a trained synthesis model, with controllable inten-
sity via a scaling factor. The open-source code and pretrained
model2 contain pre-computed emotion vectors covering our cat-
egories, so we used those along with a speaker reference sample
taken from the longest neutral sentence for each of the 10 En-
glish ESD speakers. A scaling value of 0.2 was used after ob-
serving informally that higher values produced too many syn-
thesis errors; a value of 0 was chosen for the ‘neutral’ category.
Tortoise[19] combines an autoregressive decoder, a con-
trastive model to rank outputs, and a denoising diffusion prob-
abilistic model to enable training on large datasets to produce
synthesized speech with both text-conditioning capability and
zero-shot speaker transfer. We prompt Tortoise with the prompt,
“I am really [emotion],” except for the neutral case in which
no prompt is used. The instructions recommend using at least
three audio samples for conditioning speaker ID, so we chose
the three longest neutral sentences for each ESD speaker.
MaskGCT[20] is a zero-shot text-to-speech system based
on a masked generative codec transformer architecture that can
1https://github.com/openitu/STL/tree/dev/src/
sv56
2https://github.com/tonychenxyz/emoknob
clone both speaker identity and style information from one au-
dio prompt. We use the longest sentence for each ESD speaker
in each of the five emotional categories for these prompts.
V ALL-E X[21] is a neural codec cross-lingual language
model based TTS system. Although we do not use this model’s
cross-lingual capabilities in this work, we wished to evaluate
its emotional style transfer abilities. We used an open-source
implementation and pretrained model from Github3. Similar to
MaskGCT, we used audio prompts that capture both the target
speaker ID and emotional category together.
V evo[22] uses a VQ-V AE architecture [23] and a two-stage
approach (content-style modeling followed by acoustic model-
ing) to achieve disentanglement of timbre, style, and linguis-
tic content. We used the open-source implementation and pre-
trained model made available by the Amphion project 4. Same
as MaskGCT and V ALL-E X, we used one audio prompt captur-
ing each combination of speaker identity and emotion category.
2.3. Synthesis using text-prompted speaker IDs
Text prompt based TTS is an emerging paradigm for synthe-
sizing speech with speaker and style characteristics specified
by a written prompt. Although this method does not allow for
exact speaker control by way of an audio input, the randomly-
generated nature of the speaker identities allows us to incor-
porate greater speaker diversity into our dataset. In order to
provide some structure to the prompts and ensure some breadth
of coverage of the generated speaker identities, we created 10
conditions: five age categories (20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 years old)
and two genders (male and female). We used the following text
prompt based TTS models and prompts:
PromptTTS++[24]: Using the official code and pretrained
model5, we prompted the model as follows: “A [age] year old
[gender] speaks in a(n) [emotion] tone,” and synthesized ESD
test sentences for all combinations of prompting conditions.
ParaSpeechCaps[25]: We prompted the
parler-tts-mini-v1-paraspeechcapsmodel 6
as follows: “In a clear environment, a [age] year old [gender]
voice speaks with a(n) [emotion] tone with a measured pace.”
The “clear environment” part of the prompt was included in all
of the examples, and we added the “measured pace” part of the
prompt because we informally observed that the synthesized
speaking rate was too fast without it.
Xiaomi MiMo-Audio[26]: Using their pretrained model
and official codebase 7, we synthesized ESD sentences by
prompting the model in the same way as PromptTTS++.
2.4. API-based synthesis with pre-set speaker IDs
We generated ESD sentences using the Google Gemini API
modelgemini-2.5-flash-preview-tts 8. Since this
API does not support voice cloning to a target speaker ID, we
generated ESD test set sentences in the five emotions using 10
of the pre-set voice identities. Our prompt was, “Say [emo-
tion]ly:” followed by the text to synthesize.
3https://github.com/Plachtaa/VALL-E-X.git
4https://github.com/open-mmlab/Amphion/tree/
main/models/vc/vevo
5https://github.com/line/promptttspp
6https://github.com/ajd12342/paraspeechcaps
7https://github.com/XiaomiMiMo/MiMo-Audio
8https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/
speech-generation
4266
3. Listening Test Design
Following standard evaluation for emotional TTS [11], we col-
lected listener ratings for QMOS, in which listeners are asked
to assess synthesis quality based on pronunciation, intonation,
and signal quality, and EMOS, in which listeners are shown
the ground-truth emotion label and asked to rate how well the
speech matches that emotion. We also collected ratings for
which emotions listeners could perceive from the audio as well
as ratings for valence, arousal, and dominance, following an-
notation protocols from e.g. [9, 27]. All ratings except for the
categorical emotion choices are on a five-point scale. Although
the limitations of the MOS paradigm, such as saturation [28],
biases [29], and the fact that the obtained scores are not ab-
solute [30] are well-documented, it nevertheless remains one
of the more popular evaluation paradigms and provides useful
system ranking information, and we expect that the different
evaluation axes will provide interesting and complementary in-
formation specifically useful for emotional TTS.
To minimize listener fatigue and encourage focus on each
task, we divided the test into three parts: one for QMOS,
one for perceived emotions and EMOS, and one for va-
lence/arousal/dominance. For the perceived emotions and
EMOS part, listeners could choose from the set of five emo-
tion categories, with the option to choose more than one. After
finishing this task, they could click to reveal the ground-truth
emotion label, which was previously hidden to avoid biasing
their previous choice, after which they could rate EMOS. For
valence/arousal/dominance, a picture of the Self-Assessment
Manikin (SAM [31]) was included for reference, following the
annotation protocol of [9]. For each part, audio samples were
shared with raters in batches of 100, which were evaluated one
by one via a web interface. Listeners were required to be native
speakers of US English residing in the US. 262 unique listen-
ers participated, and we collected between 4 and 9 ratings per
sample, with the majority of samples receiving 7 ratings.
4. Listening Test Results and Analysis
We report the results of the listening test in terms of system
rankings and different aspects of listeners’ perceptions of the
emotional content.
4.1. QMOS and EMOS results
We report the results for QMOS and EMOS in Table 1. We
would like to emphasize that the primary purpose of this listen-
ing test wasnotto evaluate TTS systems but to create a dataset
for developing quality assessment models, and as such, it is not
possible to make completely fair comparisons across all the in-
cluded systems (from the point of view of evaluating TTS sys-
tems) due to the differing lexical content and speaker identities
that were synthesized. Table 1 groups the systems by those be-
tween which fair comparisons can be made: ones based on Dai-
lyTalk, ones synthesizing ESD content and speaker identities,
ones using prompt-generated speaker identities, and API-based
synthesis; comparisons across the groups should be made with
caution or not at all.
To compute statistical significance of differences, we use
the Mann-Whitney U test [32] at a threshold of p≤0.05, with
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. We make com-
parisons within the groups of systems shown in Table 1 only.
For the DailyTalk group, all systems are significantly dif-
ferent in terms of QMOS. For EMOS, the only significant dif-
ference is between GPT-Talker and DailyTalk.
Table 1:QMOS and EMOS results by system. Italicized system IDs are
natural speech. From top to bottom, the groupings are DailyTalk-based
synthesis, ESD-based synthesis, synthesis using prompt-generated
speaker identities, and API-based synthesis using pre-set speaker iden-
tities.
System QMOS EMOS
DailyTalk3.48 3.75
GPT-Talker 2.80 3.53
ECSS 2.07 3.50
ESD3.71 3.90
Tortoise 3.77 2.61
EmoDPO 3.64 3.59
MaskGCT 3.42 3.43
EmoSpeech 2.63 2.86
V ALL-E X 2.59 2.83
EmoKnob 2.51 2.88
Vevo 2.20 2.53
ParaSpeechCaps 3.17 3.10
MiMo-Audio 2.74 2.80
PromptTTS++ 2.65 2.47
Gemini 4.21 3.89
Out of the the ESD group, for QMOS, all differences were
significant except for between EmoSpeech and V ALL-E X. For
EMOS, EmoSpeech, V ALL-E X, and EmoKnob were all not
significantly different from each other; all other differences
were significant.
Out of the text-prompted group, all differences are signifi-
cant for both QMOS and EMOS.
4.2. Emotion perception results
Although only one emotion category per utterance was used
as the target for synthesis, listeners were permitted to choose
multiple categories. The majority of ratings only included one
emotion category. When multiple emotions were chosen, the
most common combination was Neutral and Sad, with a count
of 6,425 ratings.
We expect that a high EMOS rating will coincide with
a large percent of listeners choosing the target emotion cate-
gory for the free-choice question. We therefore measured Pear-
son correlation between percent of listeners choosing the target
emotion category for an utterance with that utterance’s averaged
EMOS, and found a coefficient of 0.92.
4.3. Valence, arousal, and dominance distributions
We compute the earth mover’s distance (EMD) between the dis-
tributions of valence, arousal, and dominance ratings for syn-
thesized and natural speech, and measure correlations between
those and QMOS/EMOS. We expect an inverse relationship
(smaller distances indicate higher similarity to natural speech;
negative correlations are therefore expected). Considering prior
findings [33] showing the importance of using matched refer-
ence data, we use ESD as the reference data and analyze ESD-
based synthesis systems only (second section in Table 1). Re-
sults are shown in Table 2.
We observe strong correlations between distributional sim-
ilarity of valence, arousal, and dominance with EMOS ratings
in particular. This knowledge can potentially inform the devel-
opment of unsupervised approaches for evaluating synthesis of
unseen emotion categories based on distributional similarities
in a similar manner to TTSDS [34].
4267
Table 2:System-level SRCCs of earth mover’s distances (EMD) of va-
lence, arousal, and dominance distributions between synthesized and
natural speech with QMOS and EMOS ratings, per emotion.
Emotion corr . QMOS corr . EMOS
Neutral−0.90−0.79
Happy−0.69−0.88
Angry−0.52−0.98
Sad−0.17−0.81
Surprise−0.19−0.86
5. Experiments
In order to determine the capabilities of existing models to pre-
dict human ratings for emotional synthesized speech, we con-
duct several experiments on zero-shot prediction of labels using
pretrained MOS predictors, an LLM, and an emotion predictor.
5.1. QMOS prediction
We use three existing models to predict QMOS labels: SSL-
MOS [35], a wav2vec2 [36] model fine-tuned on the BVCC
corpus [6] (English synthesized speech without emotional con-
tent), UTMOS [4], a system which has seen widespread adop-
tion as an objective metric for TTS (e.g., [5]) and was also
trained on BVCC, and Google Gemini, an audio LLM which
was prompted using the same instructions given to human lis-
teners, following an “LLM-as-judge” approach [37]. We do not
conduct fine-tuning on any of these models and use them only in
a zero-shot manner. System-level SRCCs between predictions
and human ratings are shown in Table 3.
Table 3:System-level SRCCs between predicted and ground-truth
QMOS ratings.
Emotion SSL-MOS UTMOS Gemini
Neutral 0.15 0.78 0.51
Happy 0.39 0.70 0.55
Angry 0.41 0.55 0.73
Sad 0.43 0.86 0.78
Surprise 0.81 0.81 0.78
Overall 0.27 0.80 0.67
Despite not being trained on any emotional data, UTMOS
overall had the best predictive performance, although it strug-
gled on the Angry condition; Gemini predicted this challenging
case better than either of the supervisedly-trained models.
5.2. EMOS prediction
We consider the Emotion2Vec [38] classifiers as predictors for
EMOS. The EMOS rating task is fundamentally different from
emotion classification; listeners may reasonably give low rat-
ings to samples that do not sufficiently convey the target emo-
tion. Therefore, we consider Emotion2vec’sprobabilityof the
ground-truth emotion as a predictor. Three pretrained model
variants (base,large, andseed) are evaluated. Addition-
ally, we prompted Gemini with the same instructions given to
listeners to evaluate its EMOS prediction capability.
System-level Spearman ranking correlations with EMOS
ratings are shown in Table 4. We can observe some reason-
able correlations with room for improvement, and all models’
predictions vary depending on the emotion.
Table 4:System-level SRCCs between predicted and ground-truth
EMOS ratings.
Emotion E2V-base E2V-large E2V-seed Gemini
Neutral 0.60 0.62 0.50 0.76
Happy 0.77 0.78 0.82 0.65
Angry 0.94 0.90 0.93 0.62
Sad 0.87 0.86 0.85 0.82
Surprise 0.95 0.94 0.93 0.85
Overall 0.81 0.82 0.70 0.84
5.3. Additional LLM-as-judge experiments
The general-purpose nature of audio LLMs raises the pos-
sibility of using them for new audio evaluation tasks with-
out any special-purpose training. To explore this, we eval-
uate Gemini on the emotion category choice and the va-
lence/arousal/dominance rating tasks by giving it the same in-
structions as the human listeners, again in a zero-shot manner.
We prompted Gemini to produce binary responses for each
of the five emotion categories for all audio samples, and then
evaluated their match to human ratings by taking the absolute
value of the difference between the LLM’s choice and the per-
cent of human listeners choosing that emotion for that audio
sample (e.g., if the LLM chooses an emotion category, and no
human listeners chose that category for that sample, then the
error value is 1). The averaged error value over all emotion cat-
egories for all audio samples was 0.41. To determine whether
these values are better than random guessing, we re-computed
this error value using coin tosses instead of the LLM output for
five random seeds. We obtained the expected error value of 0.50
with a variance close to 0, confirming the LLM’s better-than-
random performance. For comparison, although Emotion2vec
was trained with the objective of predicting a single emotion
category, we can also use its category probabilities as predic-
tors of listeners’ chosen categories; using probabilities from
Emotion2vec-large, we obtained an error value of 0.38.
For valence, arousal, and dominance, we compute Spear-
man correlations at the utterance level between LLM outputs
and averaged human ratings, since researchers do not use these
values to rank TTS systems and higher values do not necessarily
correspond to better TTS. We obtained correlations of 0.45 for
valence, 0.42 for dominance, and 0.58 for arousal, indicating
the challenging nature of predicting these factors in a zero-shot
manner.
6. Discussion and Conclusions
We have collected the first large-scale dataset of emotional
synthesized speech labeled by listeners for quality, perceived
emotions, degree of match to the target emotion, and valence,
arousal, and dominance. Although we have observed that ex-
isting MOS predictors, emotion predictors, and audio LLMs
work reasonably well for predicting the human ratings, we have
shown that there is still