From Tokens to Faces: Investigating Discrete Speech Representations for 3D
Facial Animation
Pedro R. Correa ID 1,2,˚˚, Olivier Perrotin ID 2, Samir Sadok ID 3,
Paula D. P . CostaID 1, Thomas Hueber ID 2,˚˚
1 Univ. Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Brazil
2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, GIPSA-lab, France
3 Inria at Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, LJK, France
p243236@dac.unicamp.br, olivier.perrotin@grenoble-inp.fr, Samir.sadok@inria.fr,
paulad@unicamp.br, thomas.hueber@grenoble-inp.fr
Abstract
The choice of speech representation is critical in speech-
driven 3D facial animation. Representations differ in what they
encode: SSL features emphasize segmental and semantic cues,
neural codecs yield latents optimized for acoustic reconstruc-
tion, and ASR-style objectives produce label-based spaces. We
evaluate four speech representation families for 3D facial syn-
thesis, comparing their facial reconstruction quality across two
facial decoders using objective metrics and a perceptual eval-
uation. We additionally conduct probing analyses that relate
tokenized representations to phonetic units and to articulatory
deformations. We found that encoding phonetic classes is bene-
ficial for accurate facial animation prediction on both semantic
and label-based representations with comparable facial anima-
tion quality. From the latter, we introduce an Audio Visual Text-
to-Speech (A VTTS) pipeline that leverages, as a shared space,
discrete representations to decode speech and 3D facial motion.
Index Terms: speech-driven facial animation, speech represen-
tations, discrete units, articulatory probing, text-to-speech.
1. Introduction
Speech-driven 3D facial animation aims to synthesize tempo-
rally coherent and accurate facial movements directly from
speech signals [1, 2, 3, 4]. Central to this task, most recent
architectures (Fig. 1) use a speech representation bottleneck,
which may capture discrete phonetic class information, continu-
ous articulatory dynamics, and prosody at the same time. While
recent systems achieve good results, it remains unclear which
properties and information in speech representations are truly
necessary to drive accurate and natural facial animation.
Most state-of-the-art (SOTA) facial animation methods rely
on continuous hidden representations extracted from large-
scale self-supervised learning (SSL) speech models such as
wav2vec 2.0 [5], HuBERT [6], and Whisper [7], as input
to temporal decoders. For instance, FaceFormer [8] and
CodeTalker [9] introduced autoregressive transformers over
wav2vec 2.0 features, while FaceDiffuser [10] reframed the
task as a diffusion-based decoder over HuBERT representa-
tions. SSL representations are learned from massive amounts
of speech data using amasking pretext task, which consists of
training the model to fill in gaps in the input signal from the sur-
rounding context using discrete signal representations. There-
fore, those models inherently specialize in encoding discrete
speech events, such as phonetic classes, but in a highly contex-
tualized setting sometimes called“semantic representation”.
**indicates the corresponding author.
General Pipeline for Benchmarking
Facial 
Decoder
Speech
Decoder
TTS
System
Speech
Encoder
Inputs 
(Speech or Text)
Speech Representation 
(Discrete or Continuous)
Outputs
(Speech and Facial Animation)
Figure 1:Speech representations (middle) are extracted either
from input speech using a speech encoder (top) or produced
within a text-to-speech (TTS) pathway conditioned on text and
reference speech (bottom). Both discrete and continuous repre-
sentations are illustrated, with colour coding indicating empha-
sis on acoustic vs. semantic information. The shared represen-
tation can then be decoded into speech audio (speech decoder)
and 3D facial motion (facial decoder).
The success of such SSL representations in speech-driven an-
imation suggests that highly contextualized segmental informa-
tion provides sufficient cues for predicting realistic continuous
articulatory trajectories to drive facial motions.
In parallel, recent speech generation pipelines have shifted
toward using neural audio codecs (e.g., WavTokenizer, Big-
Codec) [11, 12] to compress speech signals into a low-
dimensional bottleneck. In this latent space, the resulting rep-
resentations are less constrained and do not explicitly encode
structured segmental or suprasegmental information [13]. Con-
sequently, these are commonly referred to asacoustic repre-
sentations. In between, SpeechTokenizer [14] uses successive
residual vector quantized layers as speech representation, and
combines a reconstruction pretext task with the distillation of
HuBERT representations on the first layer to lead to a hybrid
semantic+acoustic representation. Towards discrete speech in-
formation modelling, CosyV oice2 [15] trains a speech encoder
with anAutomatic Speech Recognition pretext task, including
labels for characters and prosodic events (e.g., emphasis, speak-
ing rate). Therefore, this training may push the model to create
representations that mostly encode discrete speech information.
This representation space will be referred to aslabel-basedfrom
now on. While all these speech representations can be decoded
into speech with various levels of quality, the same question
arises for facial animation:which information should a speech
representation expose to best drive 3D facial animation?
A second aspect is that most speech representations used
5404
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1397
for audio reconstruction are quantized (or tokenized). This
change of paradigm may be one reason why, despite a grow-
ing interest in discrete speech representations, their suitability
for speech-driven facial animation remains fairly unexplored.
VQTalker maps discrete speech tokens to quantized facial mo-
tion tokens for multilingual 2D talking head synthesis, show-
ing that discrete-to-discrete mappings can outperform continu-
ous alternatives in that setting [16]. SOLAMI employs discrete
speech and motion tokens within a social interaction frame-
work for 3D autonomous characters, focusing on body ges-
tures [17]. Interestingly, both methods use SpeechTokenizer
as a speech encoder, which combines the semantic represen-
tation of HuBERT with an additional acoustic representation,
but neither examines the relevance of using such hybrid repre-
sentations for facial articulation prediction. Inversely, and to
the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated the use
of either fullyacousticrepresentations (no encoding of discrete
phonetic classes) or fullylabel-basedrepresentations (mostly
encoding discrete events) to predict 3D facial animations. Thus,
it remains unclear whether token spaces capture phoneme-level
classes, articulatory dynamics, or higher-level abstractions that
can be efficiently mapped to 3D facial deformations.
In this work, we present a systematic evaluation of four
speech representations for 3D facial information, including
acoustic,semantic+acoustic,semantic, andlabel-based, with a
focus on the information they make accessible for facial decod-
ing (see Fig. 1). Our contributions are the following: (1) We
compare four speech encoders spanning the aforementioned
speech representations across two temporal facial decoding ar-
chitectures. Performance is assessed using objective metrics
and a perceptual evaluation to compare animation realism and
lip-speech coherence subjectively. (2) In addition, we conduct
probing analyses that relate speech representations to phonetic
units, reflecting discrete class-like content, and to blendshape
clusters, reflecting articulatory correlation. (3) Finally, we ob-
serve that tokenized speech representations open a practical op-
portunity: since text-to-speech (TTS) systems already produce
such tokens as an intermediate step (e.g., [15, 18]), a single rep-
resentation can be decoded simultaneously into speech audio
and facial motion, as done by [19] with continuous textual rep-
resentations of a FastSpeech [20] model. We exploit this to in-
troduce a proof-of-concept of an Audio Visual Text-to-Speech
(A VTTS) pipeline that generates synchronized speech and 3D
facial animation from text, without requiring a separate audio-
driven stage.
2. Method
2.1. Experimental Setup
To investigate which speech tokens can serve as effective rep-
resentations for speech-driven 3D facial animation, we adopted
a comparative experimental framework. The general pipeline
of our method is illustrated in Fig. 1. We evaluated four speech
encoders: HuBERT (HB) [6], SpeechTokenizer (ST) [14], Wav-
Tokenizer (WT) [11], and CosyV oice2 (CV2) [15]. Each en-
coder is paired with one of two facial decoders: a Gated Re-
current Unit (GRU) [21] or a Transformer (T.) architecture
[22]. [HB+GRU] serves as our SSL representation baseline
(Base) and is the exact reproduction of the FaceDiffuser [10]
architecture and training 1. The remaining three models are
discrete tokenizers that cover different representation learn-
ing designs: SpeechTokenizer uses a multi-codebook withse-
1https://github.com/uuembodiedsocialai/FaceDiffuser
Important
Reference FaceDiffuser HuBERT + T CosyVoice2 + T AVTTS
Walk
Shopping
/ɪmˈpɔːtənt/
/wɔːk/
/ˈʃɒpɪŋ/
Figure 2:Sequence of rendered blendshapes across different
models and audio snippets. With each different line, we are able
to visually assess mouth and lip shapes across different groups
of phonemes with significantly distinct visemes. Mesh model
adapted from EmoTalk [24].
manticdistillation; WavTokenizer employs a single-codebook
with extreme compression aiming atacousticreconstruction;
and CosyV oice2 relies on a supervisedlabel-basedgenerative
framework. Regarding the facial decoders, the GRU operates
frame-by-frame, while the non-causal Transformer processes
full sequences via self-attention. All combinations of encoder
and decoder have been done relatively to theBasearchitecture
to minimize pairwise comparisons between encoder or decoder
variations. The four variants have been implemented with sim-
ilar dimensions and hyperparameters to minimise differences
between models. Among all variants, [HB+T.], [ST+GRU], and
[ST+T.] combinations can be found in the literature even though
under different architectures thanBase[17, 23]. We call these
variantsV SOTA. The remaining combinations involving Wav-
Tokenizer and CosyV oice2 are, to the best of our knowledge,
never been tested for facial animation prediction. We call these
variantsV OURS.
Each encoder–decoder combination was trained with the
encoder frozen using pre-trained weights, and the decoder
trained from scratch on the BEAT2 dataset [25]. This dataset
provides approximately 27 hours of English speech waveforms
from 25 different speakers (native and non-native) in scripted
monologues, uttered in 8 different basic emotions. They are
aligned with 3D facial motion in FLAME parameter space. To
standardize the output, we convert these FLAME parameters to
51-dimensional ARKit blendshapes using a transformation ma-
trix provided by the dataset authors [26]. The facial decoders
map the extracted speech representations to these ARKit blend-
shapes. Inspired by [10], the GRU serves as the denoising net-
work in a diffusion process, trained withL 1 reconstruction loss
for direct data prediction instead of noise prediction. The Trans-
former consists of decoder layers with cross-attention, and was
trained withL 1 loss combined with first- and second-order mo-
tion smoothness losses (velocity and acceleration) to encourage
temporal coherence.
Fig. 2 shows a visual comparison of rendered sequences of
blendshape frames. [CV2+T.] output is slightly closer to the ref-
erence when compared with FaceDiffuser (Base[HB+GRU]),
and in pair with the continuous speech representation approach
of [HB+T.]. In the following section, we introduce quantitative
metrics to assess these differences.
5405
2.2. Evaluation Metrics
Facial Animation Metrics.We evaluated reconstruction us-
ing Lips Vertex Error (LVE) adapted for blendshapes, which
computes the mean squared distance between the predicted and
ground-truth lip, jaw, and mouth blendshapes. However, recent
studies [27, 28] have shown that most reconstruction objective
metrics often correlate poorly with human perception of syn-
thetic facial animations. To address this, we additionally re-
ported Jitter Score, which measures the second-degree deriva-
tive (acceleration) of blendshape frames, and Bilabial Closure
Score (BCS), to better capture articulatory accuracy. Our pro-
posed BCS, which is learned on the full 51-D blendshape vector,
evaluates effective lip closure during bilabials/b/, /p/and/m/:
we first calculated on the ground truth data a threshold which
bounds the blendshape values on70%of the bilabial frames,
i.e., which defines the lip closure position. Second, we calcu-
lated the number of predicted frames that passed this threshold
on bilabial phones and divided it by the total number of bilabial
frames to obtain the BCS. The impact of the speech encoder
and the facial decoder on LVE and Jitter was investigated us-
ing linear regression models (R functionlme). Post-hoc pair-
wise comparisons were conducted using theemmeanspack-
age, with significance set atpă0.05.
Perceptual Evaluation.From all encoder-decoder combina-
tions, we choose three meaningful representatives: [HB+GRU],
ourBasemodel; [HB+T.], aV SOTA variant to assess decoder
influence compared toBase; and [CV2+T.], theV OURS vari-
ant which obtained the best objective scores (section 3). The
evaluation was conducted on Prolific following a MUSHRA-
like protocol: for a given utterance, participants were asked first
to watch a reference video, and then rate, from 0 to 100, four
videos (the three systems and a hidden reference identical to
the presented reference video) of rendered blendshapes based
on how close the facial animation appears compared to the ref-
erence. Participants rated 15 stimuli randomly selected from
the test set. Following MUSHRA’s standard protocol, partici-
pants whose average rating of the hidden reference was below
80% were excluded from further analysis. While lower scores
on the hidden reference may reflect differences in scale usage or
individual rating strategies, they can also indicate reduced task
engagement or difficulty in recognizing stimulus equivalence
within the MUSHRA framework. After applying this criterion,
the final sample consisted of 30 participants. We assessed the
effect of the model on the MUSHRA scores using a beta regres-
sion model (R functionglmmTMB), followed by post-hoc pair-
wise comparisons (R functionemmeans), with significance set
atpă0.05.
Probing Metrics.To better understand how the variety of
speech representations under study encode speech and facial
information, we conducted probing of phonetic classes and fa-
cial information for all four encoders. For consistency, we also
quantized HuBERT representations. We first aligned phonetic
and facial information with speech tokens of all models for each
frame. We used the phone alignment provided with the dataset
to assign a phonetic class to each token. For facial features, we
focused on both discrete representations in the form of canon-
ical facial poses, which we callvisemes, and continuous repre-
sentations in the form of raw blendshapes prediction. To ob-
tain the visemes, we clustered ground-truth blendshapes vec-
tors from the test set using thek-means algorithm, discretizing
the 51D continuous representations into 32 visemes. Then, we
aligned predicted tokens with facial motion captured at 30 FPS
using nearest-neighbour temporal matching. We finally associ-
ated the nearestvisemeto each token.
To probe both phonetic classes and visemes (i.e., discrete
representations of speech and facial movements), we computed
co-occurrence statistics between token IDs and phoneme or
viseme labels across the test set, using normalized entropy:
ˆHpX|tq“
«
´
Kÿ
i“1
ppxi|tqlog 2 ppxi|tq
ff
{log 2pKq(1)
whereXis either the set ofKvisemesVor phonemesP.ppx i|
tqis the fraction of times tokentco-occurs with targetx iPX.
The termlog 2pKqcorresponds to the maximum entropy, i.e.,
when predicting one sample amongKwith uniform distribution
(chance level). Normalising by this term bounds ˆHbetween 0
(minimum entropy, one-to-one mapping between all tokens and
visemes/phonemes) and 1 (maximum entropy, chance level to
predict all visemes/phonemes from any token).
To complement this probing of discrete phoneme and
viseme representations, we also employ a Ridge regression
probe to directly predict continuous blendshape values from se-
quences of one-hot token features. We report the median co-
efficient of determinationR 2 across all blendshapes as a mea-
sure of a (linear) continuous representation of facial movements
within the speech representation space.
3. Results and Discussion
Objective metrics.Table 1 shows the results for the objec-
tive metrics on generated animation sequences by our 8 model
variants on the BEAT2 test set (265 stimuli, or approximately
4 hours). In terms of lips and mouth accuracy (LVE), both Hu-
BERT models score higher than the discrete models, although
the performance of [CV2+T.] is not far behind. Also, mod-
els with discrete speech representations perform significantly
better when coupled with the Transformer architecture, while
the continuous HuBERT representation shows equivalent re-
sults between decoders. For Jitter, all speech representations
decoded with a Transformer get better results than those with
a GRU. In terms of lip closure (BCS), theBasemodel gets the
highest score, closely followed by [CV2+T.], then [HB+T.]. All
other models display very low values, showing an absence of
expected lip closure during bilabial phonemes.
Perceptual Evaluation.Fig. 3 shows the results from the
perceptual evaluation. We observe three groups of conditions:
the reference rated significantly higher, followed by [HB+GRU]
(Base) and [CV2+T.] (VOURS) with a non-significant difference
between the two, and finally [HB+T.] (VSOTA). Compared with
Table 1, we can observe that the evaluated setups in the percep-
tual evaluation follow the same order of performance on BCS,
which is not the case for LVE. This indicates, for this work, a
closer correlation between perceptual analysis and lip-closing
metrics, instead of traditional reconstruction metrics.
Probing speech representations.The last three columns of Ta-
ble 1 show the results for the probing stage on the speech repre-
sentations. Thesemantic+acousticrepresentation provides the
best representation of phonetic classes ( ˆHpP|tq), followed by
semantic,label-based, and finallyacoustic. This shows that
distilling HuBERT within SpeechTokenizer is even more effi-
cient than HuBERT representations themselves to encode pho-
netic information. As forlabel-basedrepresentations, the train-
ing task is character-oriented (as opposed to phoneme-oriented),
and could explain the lower scores. The low score ofacous-
ticrepresentations is consistent with previous observations [13].
Globally, if all models encode little information about visemes,
5406
Table 1:Objective metrics from predicted blendshape sequences and probing analysis on speech representations.Baseis FaceDif-
fuser [10],V SOTA are variants ofBasefound in SOTA,V OURS are novel variants. Pairs of symbols indicate when the difference between
the two reported metrics is not statistically significant (pă0.05). Bold (resp. underline) indicates best (resp. second best) scores.
Speech representation Facial decoder Type LVEÓJitterÓBCS (%)Ò ˆHpP|tq(%)Ó ˆHpV|tq(%)ÓR 2 Ò
semantic
(HuBERT [6])
GRUBase0.26˛80.3‚57.5 44.4 91.50.25
Trans.V SOTA 0.26˛45.5 ‚27.6
semantic+acoustic
(SpeechTokenizer [14])
GRUV SOTA 0.53‚74.4‚3.4 39.690.4 0.04
Trans.V SOTA 0.34‚35.2‚2.3
acoustic
(WavTokenizer [11])
GRUV OURS 0.84‚93.3‚0.4 73.2 91.4 0.08
Trans.V OURS 0.33‚43.6 ‚6.2
label-based
(CosyV oice2 [15])
GRUV OURS 0.46‚76.5‚3.9 57.784.30.10
Trans.V OURS 0.28 ‚50.3‚47.0
0 20406080100
n 450 450 450 450
Reference HuBERT+GRU CosyVoice2+T. HuBERT+T.
0 20406080100
MUSHRA Score
p < 0.05 N.S. p < 0.05
Figure 3:MUSHRA-like scores of the perceptual evaluation
across three different models and the reference. N.S. means no
statistical significance between the pair of distributions.
thelabel-basedrepresentation stands out, which could have
been favoured by a fully supervised discrete output training
task. Finally, compared to HuBERT, all three tokenized rep-
resentations display a very lowR 2 metric, which measures how
accurately a blendshape trajectory can be predicted from tokens,
which is intrinsically consistent with the continuous/discrete na-
ture of the representations.
Discussion.By examining evaluations, the first striking result
is the adequacy of thesemanticrepresentation (Base) for facial
animation prediction, both in terms of objective and perceptual
metrics. This justifies thatsemanticrepresentations that encode
well phonetic classes are a suitable representation for the task.
Very interestingly, our proposed variant [CV2+T.] is very com-
petitive in terms of performance: it is not significantly differ-
ent thanBasefrom a perceptual point of view, and itslabel-
basedspeech representation also allows the encoding of pho-
netic classes to a certain extent. Surprisingly, hybridseman-
tic+acousticrepresentations did not provide satisfactory facial
animation prediction, despite their excellent encoding of pho-
netic information. Results are comparable withacousticrepre-
sentations only, suggesting that the presence of low-structured
acousticrepresentations might be detrimental to the prediction
of facial animation. Overall, these results suggest that pho-
netic class information could be a necessary but not sufficient
condition for accurate facial animation prediction, as it should
be accompanied by an absence of low-structured acoustic in-
formation. As for the necessity of encoding facial represen-
tation, we can note that the best predicted models,Baseand
[CV2+T.], stand out at encoding continuous blendshape and
discrete visemes, respectively. Nevertheless, these values re-
main low, and further investigation is needed to evaluate the
necessity of those representations for accurate prediction.
4. Towards a Unified A VTTS Pipeline
To further explore the capabilities of speech tokens to be used
for facial animation, we propose aproof-of-conceptof a shared
representation for both speech and face synthesis in a unified
framework (see Fig. 1). The CosyV oice2 TTS model predicts
speech tokens from text and a reference audio using an autore-
gressive LLM backbone. Thus, we simply employ our facial
Transformer decoder, which was already trained on CosyV oice2
representations, to predict blendshape sequences. This is done
in parallel to the flow-matching speech decoder, which gener-
ates the speech waveform. Since both decoders operate from
the same token sequence, the resulting speech and facial motion
are inherently synchronized, while it also eliminates the conven-
tional two-stage paradigm in which text is first synthesized into
audio and then processed by a separate speech-driven animation
model. Finally, if Fig. 2 displays less contrast of lip movement
across phonemes with A VTTS compared with the audio-driven
version [CV2+T.], our demo page2displays encouraging results,
which open the door to dedicated work on A VTTS using dis-
crete representations.
5. Conclusion
This work presented a systematic comparison ofsemantic,se-
mantic+acoustic,acoustic, andlabel-basedspeech representa-
tions for 3D facial animation generation. Our results demon-
strated that bothsemanticandlabel-basedrepresentations are
suitable candidates for this task, and that they have similar per-
ceptual performance. Probing analysis revealed that phonetic
information encoding seems to be a necessary condition for
the task, provi