The ArtComp dataset: Articulatory and Acoustic Measurements of Swedish in
Speech with Naturally Manipulated Jaw Position
El´ısabet Eir Cortes ID 1, Lisa Gustavsson ID 1, Ellen Marklund ID 1
1 Department of Linguistics, Stockholm University, Sweden
elisabet.cortes@ling.su.se, lisa.gustavssom@ling.su.se, ellen.marklund@ling.su.se
Abstract
The ArtComp dataset contains time-aligned articulatory and
acoustic data from seven native speakers of Central Standard
Swedish (CSS). Articulatory data consist of electromagnetic
articulography (EMA), electroglottography (EGG) and video.
Acoustic data consist of analysis output from high quality au-
dio recordings. The dataset is unique in that it consists of speech
where jaw position is perturbed by natural means. Variable vo-
cal effort ranging from soft to shouting was elicited, resulting in
variable and exaggerated jaw opening. This type of data enables
research targeting adaptive behaviour in the other articulators.
Methods used in collecting and post-processing this dataset
are described in detail, together with rationale for the methods
chosen. A preview of data is given as time-variations and 2D-
tracings of sensor data, to visually illustrate processed data.
Index Terms: acoustics, adaptive articulation, compensatory
behaviour, EEG, electroglottography, electromagnetic articu-
lography, EMA, loud speech, perturbed jaw, Swedish vowels,
vocal effort
1. Introduction
The ArtComp dataset consists of acoustic and articulatory
data of Central Standard Swedish (CSS) where the speakers’
mandibular (lower jaw, hereinafter jaw) position is perturbed
through elicitation of varying vocal effort.
ArtComp is a subset of a larger dataset. In addition to the
jaw opening material presented here, the larger dataset con-
tains all consonants and vowels of CSS in utterances of vari-
able length, from isolated vowels to conversational speech. The
datasets are still under construction, with plans for additional
speakers, and will enable research into speech variability from
phonetic, technological, and clinical points of view.
The means of capturing articulatory data for these datasets
were EMA, EGG and video. EMA is affordable and versatile
for capturing articulatory data. Small sensor coils are affixed
to the articulators and when the sensors move within an elec-
tromagnetic field, the system registers their position in three
dimensions. In section 1.1 below, a number of existing EMA
datasets will be listed, with focus on datasets with Swedish.
The ArtComp dataset is unique in the sense that one artic-
ulatory variable, jaw position, is manipulated to include vari-
ability exceeding that in everyday conversational speech. This
permits studying adaptive behaviour, when the speaker must
compensate for perturbed circumstances, for example larger jaw
opening than typically. In ArtComp, jaw position was manipu-
lated by eliciting varying degrees of vocal effort in the speakers.
In section 1.2, different ways that previously have been used to
manipulate jaw opening are presented, for comparison with the
method used in the current dataset.
1.1. EMA datasets – EMA datasets with Swedish
Several EMA datasets have been reported with languages such
as English (BrENG [1,2], AmENG [3,4]), Italian [5], Mandarin,
Cantonese, Hakka, and Teochew [6], Polish [7, 8] German [9,
10], Norwegian [11], French [12,13], Finnish and Russian [14],
Icelandic [15], Estonian [16] and Japanese [17].
Reports on EMA recordings with Swedish are quite a few.
In 1985-89, Schulman recorded in all [18, 19] nine speakers
equipped with sensors on the jaw (JW), upper lip (UL) and
lower lip (LL). The speakers uttered Swedish vowels in normal
and loud speech, the focus being on the effect of loud speech on
normal articulation. Engwall [20] recorded one speaker with
five sensors, JW, UL and three on the tongue (Tx3). Elec-
tropalatograpy (EPA) data was collected at the same time. The
speaker uttered central Swedish fricatives in a vowel context.
Focus was on articulatory movements in fricatives. Beskow
et al. [21] report on recordings of one speaker equipped with
five sensors (JW, UL, Tx3) in combination with optical motion
tracking of face for the purpose of resynthesis. Sch¨otz et al [22]
recorded articulatory data from 50 speakers, using two sensors,
UL and LL, focusing on variability of lip movements as a func-
tion of age. Sch ¨otz et al [23] and Frid et al [24] gathered EMA
data from in all 27 speakers, using ten sensors, JW, UL, LL,
Tx5, as well as one in each mouth corner (MCx2). Focus was
on dialectal differences of tongue articulation in palatal vowels.
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, Geumann [9] and
Schulman [18, 19] are the only ones to have collected articu-
latory data uttered with varying vocal effort. Geumann exam-
ined acoustic and articulatory effects of higher loudness level
on German speech sounds. Six speakers were equipped with
seven sensors, JWx3 (labial and lingual surface, chin), Tx4.
Two vocal effort levels were used, normal and loud. Schulman’s
recordings contain Swedish vowels in ‘h t’ [18] and ‘i"b b’ [19]
contexts, uttered with normal and loud voice.
The ArtComp dataset presented here contains articulatory
data from seven speakers, collected through six EMA sensors
(JW, UL, LL, MC, Tx2), EGG and video from two angles.
Acoustic data come from high quality sound recordings. The
dataset figures 18 CSS vowels in an ‘i"bb’ context, uttered with
vocal effort ranging from very soft to very loud. To this date, a
third of the material has been fully analysed, with focus on ar-
ticulatory adaptation that speakers apply to compensate for the
varying and exaggerated jaw position.
1.2. Manipulating jaw position
Studies with manipulated (or “perturbed”) jaw position have
traditionally used bite-blocks [25–35]. In these studies, the
speaker keeps a small, fixed object (a bite block) between their
molars, thereby disrupting the usual behaviour of the jaw. There
1176
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2647
are studies in which the jaw position has been manipulated with
other means, such as mechanical resistive loads [36–38], and
even evoking the masseteric stretch reflex (the “jaw-jerk” reflex)
to stiffen the temporomandibular joint (see [39]). Attempts have
been made to use more ‘natural’ forms of perturbations, such as
speaking while chewing on a chewing gum [40].
Loud speech is known to cause larger jaw openings than
normal speech [18, 41, 42]. As the increase in jaw opening
caused by loud speech is not induced by artificial means, it can
be considered to be the application of a “natural bite block”, [19,
p. 295]. A common method in eliciting varying loudness levels
in speech, is using the Lombard effect (e.g. [43]; see [44] for an
overview). Speakers in noisy environments involuntarily raise
their voice, and by exposing study participants to ambient noise,
louder speech is acquired. However, the Lombard method was
not used in collecting the dataset at hand, due to the follow-
ing: First, the aim was to collect speech with a range of vocal
effort from as soft as possible (still phonating), to as strong as
possible. Applying ambient noise only elicits stronger vocal
effort than normal, leaving the softer range without elicitation
method. Second, there were concerns for auditory discomfort
for the speakers when eliciting the strongest levels of effort.
The most natural way to elicit a wide range of vocal effort is
of course to vary the distance between speaker and listener [45].
This was though, not an option for the controlled experimental
setup necessary for the ArtComp recordings.
Taken together, due to the aim for a more ‘natural’ speaker
behaviour, the range of effort pursued, as well as the experimen-
tal settings, a specialised method to induce varying vocal effort
was applied as means to elicit varying jaw position, see 2.3 for
detailed description.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Speakers
The participants were seven L1 speakers of CSS, (3 female, 4
male), with a mean age of 31 years (range 22-37) and no known
hearing issues. The speakers were recruited from among co-
workers and acquaintances of the first author.
All speakers gave their informed consent to participate in
the study, which was approved by the Regional Ethics Commit-
tee (Dnr. 2015/63-31) as part of the research plan for the Pho-
netics Lab at Stockholm University (SU). The speakers each
received three cinema tickets for participating.
2.2. Speech materials
The ArtComp speech material figures the 18 CSS vowels in an
‘i"b b’ context, uttered with vocal effort ranging from very soft
to shouting. The bilabial context provides a naturally high onset
and offset position for the jaw for each of vowel. The vowels
are[i: I e: E æ: u: U o: O 6: 5 fi ø: œ: œfi: y: Y 0ff: 8]. ArtComp
consists of 3000 tokens, of which 1100 are fully analysed.
2.3. Eliciting varying vocal effort
To elicit varying vocal effort, a specialised setup was created by
the first author: DOV A (Damped Output and Visual Aid). The
speaker microphone output was routed through a custom-made
attenuator [46] located in the adjacent control room, and back
into a VU-meter that served as a visual aid for the speakers to
keep their vocal effort at a certain level.
The instructions were to keep the VU-meter red lights vis-
ible and that varying vocal effort might have to be used to
achieve this. The visual aid was placed alongside the presen-
tation screen for the speech material, enabling the speakers to
monitor the presence of red light from the corner of their eye.
During recording, the researcher reduced the microphone
output in 10 dB steps, each step requiring more vocal effort to
keep the red lights visible. The number of damping levels was
four or five, depending on each speaker’s effort capacity.
Speaker reports attested that with this visually aided self-
monitoring they did not have to invest mental energy into wor-
rying about their loudness level but could instead focus on utter-
ing the speech material. The researcher monitored the loudness
level from the control room and could, through a communica-
tion system, ask the speaker to repeat certain segments.
The DOV A method has been evaluated by comparing
acoustic and articulatory characteristics in a subset of the vowel
data to similar data where varying vocal effort was elicited with
ambient noise [47]. The results showed that both the articula-
tory response and the relative intensity range were greater in the
data obtained with DOV A. This confirms that DOV A is at least,
if not more, efficient than traditional methods in eliciting the
behavior necessary to vary jaw position.
2.4. Equipment
The recordings took place in a soundproof, sound damped stu-
dio, with an adjacent control room, at The Phonetic Laboratory,
Department of Linguistics, SU, Sweden. Data consist of artic-
ulatory (EMA flesh-point position), acoustic (waveform), EGG
(vocal fold contact area), and visual (lips) recordings.
2.4.1. EMA - articulatory recordings
The EMA device used for articulatory recordings was The Wave
Speech Research System [48]. Sampling frequency was 100 Hz,
field volume 50x50x50 mm. The measurement sensors were
light-weight, 3x3x3 mm, 5 degrees of freedom (DOF) with a
thin, flexible cable designed to minimise interference with nat-
ural speech articulation. A 6DOF reference sensor (REF) en-
abled the system to track the 5DOF sensors relative to the REF.
The Wave system output data are reference-corrected three-
dimensional (3D) positions of the 5DOF sensors (x, y, z) in mm
and 2D orientation data in quaternions (rotation axis and angle
relative to a base orientation, i.e., pitch and roll), at each time
sample (100 per/sec). The REF sensor provides 3D position as
well as 3D orientation data (pitch, roll, and yaw). Orientation
information was used in post-processing of data, see 2.6.2.
Real-time visualisation of the sensors allowed on-line mon-
itoring of the articulatory recordings. A specialised chair with a
head support was used to help the speaker to remain with their
head in the EMA field.
Individually customised bite-plates were created for all par-
ticipants prior to the recording (see e.g. [49]). This was done
by warming up a couple of sheets of Tenax wax (SS WHITE),
forming a quadrilateral around a wooden tongue depressor, with
a part of the depressor sticking out to act as a handle. While
still malleable, the bite-plate was inserted into the participant’s
mouth, making sure that it would reach the most posterior mo-
lars before the participant clenched into the wax, creating an
imprint of their occlusal plane. A midsagittal line was marked
on the maxilla side of the bite-plate and two 5DOF sensors fas-
tened along the line, one close to the labial surface of the cen-
tral maxillary incisors and the other centred between the 1st and
2nd molars. The two sensors represent the line of intersection
between the speaker’s midsagittal plane and the maxillary oc-
1177
clusal plane. The bite-plate recordings were used for the trans-
lation and rotation in the post-processing of data, see 2.6.2.
2.4.2. Audio
Due to the dynamics of the speech to be recorded, special care
was taken to collect high-quality audio data. An AKG CK93,
a high performance hypercardioid condenser microphone with
high sensitivity (10 mV/Pa), with an SE300B pre-amp mod-
ule, was connected to a Scarlet 2i2 audio interface [50], us-
ing Reaper [51] for the recordings. The number of audio
channels was two (stereo) and the sampling frequency was
48 000 Hz. The microphone was pointed, from a slight angle,
at the speaker’s mouth from an approximate distance of 40 cm.
In addition to the main audio recording, a second audio sig-
nal was recorded for the purpose of synchronising the EMA data
with the main audio recordings. A light-weight headset with a
lavalier microphone was connected to the Wave system’s syn-
chronising box. The speaker wore the headset, with the micro-
phone on their right side (away from the EMA field generator,
see 2.5), parallel to the cheek, extending forward to be in line
with the lips, 5 cm from their centre.
The speech material was presented on a computer screen
at eye level in front of the speaker. The screen was connected
to a computer in the control room, from where the researcher
controlled the speed of the presentation.
2.4.3. EGG
To collect the vocal fold contact area (VFCA), EEG signal
was recorded using EG2-PCX [52]. Four electrodes were held
against the speaker larynx by a Velcro collar, two on each side
of the larynx. The electrodes were coated with electrode gel to
help conduct the signal from the contacts to the neck. The sig-
nal from the EGG-box was split and led through coaxial cables
to the audio soundcard, as well as to an analogue oscilloscope
(Tectronix®), where the signal was monitored by the researcher.
2.4.4. Video
Close-up video of the lips was captured from two angles, side
and front, by two action cameras [53], (1080p, 30fps, linear
field of view). The cameras were Wi-Fi connected to a tablet to
synchronise the starting and stopping of the video recordings.
2.5. Data collection procedures and instructions
Figure 1:REF: reference sensor,
UL: upper lip, LL: lower lip, JW:
jaw, TT: tongue tip, TB: tongue
body, MC: mouth corner
Sensor placements were
chosen to be close to that
of the main publicly avail-
able databases (e.g. [1,2]).
The JW sensor was glued
to the jaw, (see sensor pro-
tocol in Fig.1) just below
the attached gingiva, to the
speaker’s right side of the
buccal frenum. Three sen-
sors were glued to the ver-
milion border of the lips,
one at the centre of the
top and bottom lip each
(UL, LL) and one in the
speaker’s left mouth cor-
ner (MC). Two sensors
were attached to the midline of the tongue, a centimetre from
the apex (TT), the other at the dorsal surface (TB). The REF
sensor, glued to the nasion, was used by the Wave system to
correct for head movements. Before the tongue sensors were
glued in place, their measured placements were marked with a
non-toxic felt-tip pen, to enable reattaching to the exact same
location in case they got detached. Cyanoacrylate tissue adhe-
sive (Histoacryl®) was used for sensors inside the mouth. The
sensor wires were routed through the right mouth corner and
taped to the cheek, leaving slack for maximum lip protrusion.
All sensors glued to external skin were glued with Medical Ad-
hesive 200 (Makeup Int.) silicon glue and secured in place with
surgical tape.
The speaker was seated with the field generator on their
left, with their articulators within the electromagnetic field. The
personalised bite-plate was carefully inserted into the speaker’s
mouth, with the instructions to lightly clench into the occlusal
imprint, while the system captured the position and orientation
of all sensors. The bite-plate recordings were used for calibra-
tion in the post-processing of articulatory data, see 2.6.2.
Each speaker’s intensity range was measured using a VU-
meter held beside the microphone at 40 cm distance from the
speaker’s mouth. The readings were used to fine tune the gain of
the audio recording, as well as in the post-processing of audio.
A clapperboard was used before and after the uttering of
speech material, for salient visual and acoustic cues on multiple
channels. The speaker worked their way through the speech
material, starting with the varying vocal effort part. The speaker
could at any time comment on their utterances, repeat if they felt
they did not pronounce as they wished, or if the desired vocal
effort was temporarily not reached. When the speaker reached
the limit of their vocal effort range, or they no longer wanted
to strain their vocal cords, they notified the researcher and the
block with varying vocal effort was ended.
Each recording session took approximately three hours. Be-
tween each speech material block, there was a break. The re-
searcher entered the studio to check the participant’s needs as
well as the setup, and to give instructions for the following
speech material. Participants could request a break anytime, or
report a loose sensor. The TB sensor was most prone to needing
re-gluing. While most speakers were recorded without issues, a
technical error was encountered for one speaker (no video).
2.6. Post-processing of data
2.6.1. Post-processing of audio data
Audio data underwent auditive and acoustic analysis in order
to verify speech sound identity and quality of recording. There-
after, the material was manually segmented and annotated using
Praat [54]. The vowels were acoustically defined, from the first
glottal pulse to where complete lip closure was attained for the
following bilabial stop, supported by analysis of visual data.
Comparable intensity measurements, across recordings and
speakers, were achieved by normalising the intensity level of
each recording to the intensity level measured 40 cm from
the speaker’s mouth within each recording. Intensity for each
speaker was then converted to percentages of a speaker-specific
intensity range, relative intensity (Rel.Int).
Acoustic analyses in terms of fundamental frequency (f o)1,
duration and amplitude were performed with scripts in Praat.
Automated formant estimations in speech with highf o are no-
toriously unreliable and were thus not used. Instead, an ag-
gregated method, developed by the first author, was employed
1Notation in compliance with [55]
1178
-34
-24
-14
-4
6
16
-5 7-4 7-3 7-2 7-1 7-731323
-34
-24
-14
-4
6
16
-57-47-37-27-17-731323
-34
-24
-14
-4
6
16
-5 7-4 7-3 7-2 7-1 7-731323
-34
-24
-14
-4
6
16
-5 7-4 7-3 7-2 7-1 7-731323
-34
-24
-14
-4
6
16
-34
-24
-14
-4
6
16
-34
-24
-14
-4
6
16
-34
-24
-14
-4
6
16
-34
-24
-14
-4
6
16
0           20      40     60    80       100       0 20           40        60     80    100
Sensor position (mm)
time (ms)
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
Sensor position vertical (mm)
Sensor position anterior-posterior (mm)
20  10        0       -10     -20  -30     -40    -5020  10        0       -10     -20  -30     -40    -50
0 dB
Rel.Int
85 dB
Rel.Int
[iˈbɒːb] [iˈbuːb] [iˈbɒːb] [iˈbuːb]
Figure 2:Two leftmost columns: Time variations of vertical dimension of sensor data from one speaker uttering [i"6:b] and [i"bu:b].
Vertical, dotted lines: acoustically defined start and end of the stressed vowels. Two rightmost columns: 2D tracings of sensor data
from the same speaker, same utterances. Sensor data appear overlaid on a schematic drawing of the midsagittal contour of a speaker.
Top row: Vocal effort 0 Rel.Int (dB), bottom row: 85 Rel.Int (dB). Dark red: UL, red: LL, blue: JW, green: TT, dark green: TB.
combining three methods: 1. Manual estimations from spec-
trogram, i.e. visually identifying the formants represented as
dark, horisontal bands of energy on a wideband spectrogram,
guided by phonetic knowledge and experience. 2. Semi-manual
inverse filtering in Sopran [56]. Sopran’s displays of the wave-
forms, spectra of the audio signal, and the EGG signal were
used to manually tune the inverse filter. Main criteria were a
smooth source spectrum envelope and a ripple-free closed phase
(see [57]). 3. Manual ‘corrections’ of LCD suggested formant
frequencies overlaid on line spectra, displayed by a custom-
made code [58]. Estimations in spectra with sparse harmon-
ics were guided by the relative amplitude of the harmonics as
follows: A formant was estimated to be centred between two
equally strong harmonics, the distance to a stronger harmonic
decreasing with increasing strength. The combined values from
these methods were evaluated by synthesis in Madde [59].
2.6.2. Post-processing of articulatory data
All sensor data underwent procedures to project data onto the
same coordinate space across speakers. Position data were
translated and rotated from the head-referenced coordinate sys-
tem into a speaker-referenced articulatory working space, where
the x-y plane is the midsagittal plane, and the x-z plane is the
maxillary occlusal plane. Origin was set to the tip of the upper
incisors, the anterior-posterior dimension individually aligned
to each speaker’s occlusal plane. This was achieved using the
bite-plate sensor data from the recordings of the customised
plate held in the speaker’s mouth (see 2.5).
2.6.3. Synchronisation of data
Video, EEG and post-processed articulatory and acoustic data
were synchronised manually, using acoustic and visual cues
from the clapperboard, see 2.5, as well as from other events
throughout the session.
2.6.4. Post-processing of visual data
The synchronised video data was segmented into speech-
material blocks, cropped to enlarged close-ups of the lips, and
enhanced (contrast, definition and sharpening). This was done
semi-manually in a video editing software [60].
3. Preview of data in ArtComp
Processed articulatory data are presented in Fig.2. The figure
shows the time variations of the vertical movements of JW, UL,
LL, TT and TB sensors, (two leftmost columns). Trajectories
of the same sensors in a 2D midsagittal space are projected on a
drawing of the midsagittal contour of a speaker, showing verti-
cal and anterior-posterior movements (two rightmost columns).
The data are from one speaker uttering [i"6:b] and [i"bu:b] at 0
dB Rel.Int. (top row) and 85 dB Rel.Int. (bottom row). Note
the difference between the vowels as well as between the two
Rel.Int. levels, especially in JW.
4. Discussion and Conclusions
The ArtComp dataset presented in this paper adds to the field
of speaker articulatory behaviours an extensive articulatory and
acoustic mapping of the full range of Swedish vowels. The main
features of the dataset are the detailed measurements of the ar-
ticulators in relation to the controlled variable jaw position en-
abling analyses of compensatory articulation.
There are some unavoidable points to note regarding the
recording procedures of the dataset. The manipulation of jaw
position 