Automating Sociophonetic Research in Under-Resourced Languages: A Case
Study of Speech Rate in Cook Islands M¯aori
Rolando Coto-Solano ID 1,∗,∗∗, Sally Akevai Nicholas ID 2,∗
1 Dartmouth College, United States
2 Waipapa Taumata Rau University of Auckland, Aotearoa New Zealand
rolando.a.coto.solano@dartmouth.edu, ake.nicholas@auckland.ac.nz
Abstract
In this paper we test the use of artificial intelligence tools, such
as speech recognition and age detection, to gather a large corpus
and semi-automate the description of sociophonetic phenom-
ena. Our case study was speech rate variation across different
islands and age groups in the Cook Islands, a previously un-
reported phenomenon for this language. We gathered a corpus
that combined fieldwork and online data and used speech recog-
nition to calculate speech rate (moras/second) for 60 speakers
of Cook Islands M ¯aori, recorded in a total of 7.5 hours of au-
dio. Automatically calculating age from speakers’ faces did not
yield good results and had to be done manually. As for the
sociophonetics, in some islands, like the Nga P ¯u Toru group,
younger speakers have a significantly faster speech rate. How-
ever, islands like Rarotonga and Aitutaki do not show this pat-
tern, which might be due to language shift in the younger gen-
eration. Future research will include more islands and speakers.
Index Terms: sociophonetics, Cook Islands M¯aori, speech rate
1. Introduction
While most sociophonetic research has focused on segments,
studying phenomena such as vocalic quality and consonantal
variation [1, 2], or on suprasegmentals, with phenomena such as
creaky voice [3], temporal dimensions of speech such as speak-
ing rate and pausing behavior have also emerged as potential
variables for social meaning. Speech rate, defined here as the
articulation rate of sounds (for example, moras per second), can
vary systematically across populations [4].
In this paper we will examine a workflow that includes NLP
software such as voice activation detection, speech recognition
models, and face identification models to accelerate sociopho-
netic work by augmenting existing corpora with online data. We
studied some of the shortcomings of these techniques, and in or-
der to do this we carried out a case study about the geographical
and potentially social variation of speech rate in Cook Islands
M¯aori.
1.1. Speech Rate as a Sociophonetic Variable
Speech rate can function as a marker of sociolinguistic personae
[5], and it can differ significantly across regional dialects, age
groups and gender. For example, Clopper & Smiljanic [6] stud-
ied American English and documented higher speaking rates in
Wisconsin than in North Carolina, a difference that was present
both in spontaneous conversation and in reading. They also re-
ported a modest tendency for men to speak faster than women.
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
Pratt [7] documented slower speaking rates as being coindexed
with a “chill” persona in a California high school.
There is a consistent pattern indicating that younger adults
tend to speak faster than older people. While this might have to
do with neuromuscular aging or with slower information pro-
cessing [8], it might also have to do with older speakers using
more frequent pauses and greater lexical diversity [9, 10, 11].
Other languages, such as Dutch [12, 13] also report that younger
speakers speak faster (about 5% faster). This difference in
speech rate can also provide social clues: Listeners in English
report that speakers are younger or older depending on their
speaking rate [14], and experimentally slowed-down speech
leads to listeners rating a voice as older [15].
Speech rate is also related to language proficiency, partic-
ularly in L2 and heritage language contexts. Speech rate, as
a proxy of oral fluency, is widely used as an indicator of L2
proficiency in research and assessment [16, 17]. L2 speakers
tend to produce slower speech than L1s, which reflects the ad-
ditional cognitive demands of speaking in their new language.
Interestingly, speech rate in an L2 is not solely determined by
proficiency: The speaking rate of a person’s L1 can predict their
speaking rate in an L2 [18], which means that already existing
social cues connected to speech rate might carry over into a sec-
ond language.
As for heritage speakers, speech rate is highly correlated
with proficiency [19], and it is argued to correlate with a
speaker’s proximity to the language. For Russian heritage
speakers, for example, those heritage speakers who kept the full
three-gender system of Russian also had higher speech rates.
Polinsky [19] observed that speech rate in general was corre-
lated with lexical access and clause construction, which was
slower for heritage speakers. Nagy & Brook [20] expanded
this work to heritage speakers of Italian, Russian and Ukrainian,
and found that speech rate indexes the dominant language of the
speaker’s childhood community. Moreover, speech rate did not
affect other sociolinguistic variables (e.g. voice onset time or
pro-drop rates), which suggests that speech rate is correlated
with global fluency rather than command of specific grammati-
cal features.
These findings have implications for Indigenous language
revitalization: It might be possible that speech rate is correlated
with proficiency in these contexts as well. One has to be careful
when applying external definitions of proficiency to Indigenous
languages. Indigenous communities usually have wide ranges
of language proficiencies, from L1 elders to semi-speakers and
rememberers, and those communities might prefer their own,
community-defined benchmarks for language use [21, 22]. That
being said, this is a context with many similarities to that of
heritage speaker communities, and so a measure of speech rate
might be indicative of differing proficiencies.
1717
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3507
In summary, speech rate has been documented to be socially
coindexed with age, with geographical origin, and with profi-
ciency in a language in the case of L2 and heritage speakers.
Therefore, it might be useful to measure proficiency in Cook
Islands M¯aori as well.
1.2. Cook Islands M ¯aori Language
Cook Islands M ¯aori (CIM) is an Eastern Polynesian language,
spoken by approximately 12500 people on the Cook Islands,
plus approximately 10000 people in the diaspora in New
Zealand and Australia [23, 24]. It is closely related to but dis-
tinct from Te Reo M¯aori from Aotearoa New Zealand.
CIM exhibits a relatively small segmental inventory (9 con-
sonants and 5 vocalic qualities), and a (C)V syllable structure
without codas or consonant clusters, characteristic of Polyne-
sian languages [25, 26]. V owels also show a phonemic length
contrast (e.g.marama‘moon’ versusm ¯arama‘to understand’).
A phonemic glottal stop (the amata) is also present, though
its surface realization ranges from a full occlusion to residual
creakiness in its neighboring vowel, conditioned by prosodic
position and sociolinguistic factors [27]. Prosodically, the lan-
guage has been analyzed as being mora-timed. It is the mora,
rather than the syllable, that is the weight-bearing unit, with a
short vowel counting as one more, and a long vowel or diph-
thong counting as two moras.
The vitality of the language depends on the exact location
of the speaker in the archipelago. There are islands like Raro-
tonga, the largest island and the hub of the country, where the
language is highly endangered and there are few young people
who speak it [28]. Rarotonga is the island with the main airport,
and the one most visited by tourists, which also makes it the one
with the highest contact with English. On the other hand, there
are small islands where there are hardly any tourists. In these is-
lands the language is merely vulnerable, and there are still chil-
dren who use it as their L1. This is the case for the three islands
of Nga P¯u Toru (Mauke, Mitiaro and Atiu). There are other is-
lands, like Aitutaki, which have a high volume of tourists but
where fluency in the language is still preserved in the older gen-
eration. The varieties on these islands are all mutually intel-
ligible, and the language has a standardized orthography [29].
CIM is used as a vehicle for education in some schools in Nga
P¯u Toru, whereas schools operate almost exclusively in English
in Rarotonga.
There has been some previous work on natural language
processing in Cook Islands M ¯aori, including work for speech
recognition [30, 31], parsing [32, 33], text-to-speech [34],
forced alignment [27, 35] and diacritic restoration [36].
2. Methodology
The goal of this project is to study whether there is variation
in speech rate across the Cook Islands, and whether it corre-
lates with any observed social patterns or patterns of language
proficiency. In this section we will describe the data collection
process, which involves automatic analysis of audio recordings.
We will provide evidence for how automated measures are ad-
equate for this study, and we will explain how we gathered a
corpus that includes online sources, and how those were labeled
for relevant sociolinguistic information.
2.1. Data Collection
The data comes from two main sources. The first one is the
Vairanga Te Tuatuacollection in Paradisec [37], which contains
transcribed recordings in the language. These recordings are
stored as ELAN transcriptions and W A V audio files, and they in-
clude naturalistic conversations and monologues. These record-
ings cover topics ranging from traditional ecological knowledge
and genealogies, to contemporary cooking recipes. This data
was collected during linguistic fieldwork, and contains informa-
tion such as the age and island of origin of each speaker. This
collections contains recordings for a total of 9 speakers (approx.
4 hours).
The second source of the data is publicly available social
media audio and video recordings. These include recordings
from the Facebook page of news sites (e.g. CITV [38]), as well
as videos from YouTube (e.g. productions from the Cook Is-
lands government about cyclone resilience [39]). These videos
were downloaded and the annotation intervals were determined
using the voice activation detector Silero [40]. After this, each
of the segments was transcribed automatically using a speech
recognition model built with Wav2Vec2 [30], which has an ac-
curacy of CER=0.06 and a WER=0.17. The transcriptions were
then saved as an ELAN file. These videos contained a total of
51 speakers, and a total of approximately 94 minutes of audio
(see table 1 below for a distribution of speakers by island and
age).
The annotations in both the ELAN transcriptions from the
Vairanga te Tuatuaand the transcriptions from online media
were split into prosodic phrases, so these will be the base of the
study. For each prosodic phrase, we calculated the number of
moras in the transcription. A short vowel is one mora and a long
vowel is two moras, so a word likeM ¯aorihas 4 moras.
2.2. Verification of Methodology
Does the combination of automatic voice activation (V AD) and
automatic transcription yield results that can be used for the
study of sociophonetics? There have been studies that indicate
that completely automated workflows can yield sociophonetic
results that have the same trends as the original data [41]. In
order to confirm this, we performed a short experiment. We
used the V AD and the ASR model to transcribe a ten minute
recording, and then manually corrected both its annotation start
and end times and the transcriptions in the annotations. We will
refer to this as the manual transcription. We also kept the au-
tomatic annotation aside, so that we could then correlate the
automatic and manual versions of the same audio recording.
We took 25 sections of the recording and calculated the rate
of moras per second in both the manual and automatic versions
of the transcription. Finally, we used a linear model to correlate
them.
As can be seen in figure 1, there is a correlation between the
manual and the automatic results. This correlation is both sta-
tistically significant (t(23)=4.3, p<0.0005) and relatively strong
(R2=0.45). While there is a systematic bias towards the auto-
matic transcriptions being slightly longer (the regression equa-
tion isautoMoras = 0.7(manualMoras) + 3.7), the relative
ranking of the speakers is preserved. Therefore, even if the re-
sults would not be exactly the same as those obtained from man-
ually corrected data, the results would show a similar statistical
trend, which would still make them useful for sociolinguistic
comparisons.
2.3. Sociolinguistic Metadata
The next challenge in assembling this dataset was to tag the
social media corpus with relevant sociolinguistic information,
such as the age of the speakers and the island that they identify
1718
Figure 1:Speech rate of the same passages, measured using
automatic transcriptions versus manually corrected transcrip-
tions. There is a high correlation between the two.
with. As for the island, we only used videos where the speak-
ers were clearly identified as being from an island, or as being
residents of a certain island.
The age of the participants is more complicated to extrapo-
late. We had access to the images of the speakers and to the ac-
tual age of twenty of the speakers (ranging from 27 to 76 years
old), so we conducted an experiment to determine whether an
artificial intelligence system could determine their ages auto-
matically. This process did not yield strong results. We tested
two algorithms: DeepFace [42] and InsightFace [43]. Figure
2 shows the correlation between the ages we do know and the
ages estimated by the AI algorithms. In the case of DeepFace, a
linear model determined that there was no significant relation-
ship between the predicted and the real age (p=0.11). As for
InsightFace, there is a significant correlation (t(18)=2.6, p<
0.05) but it is relatively weak (R 2=0.27). These low accuracy
results might be because of known biases with artificial intel-
ligence having difficulty identifying and understanding images
of people with darker skin in general, and Indigenous people in
particular [44, 45].
Figure 2:Automatic estimation of a person’s age from their face
using two AI algorithms. The performance is very poor on Cook
Islander faces.
Given the difficulties in working with automated methods,
the authors manually labeled the speakers in the images as ap-
pearing to be “older” or “younger” than 50 years old. Table 1
shows the distribution of speakers by island and manually ex-
trapolated age.
Table 1:Total of speakers and prosodic phrases (in parenthesis)
for each island and age group
Older Younger Total
Raroronga 7 (542) 5 (770) 12 (1312)
Nga P¯u Toru 24 (5793) 7 (529) 31 (6322)
Aitutaki 6 (253) 11 (196) 18 (449)
37 (6588) 23 (1495) 60 (8083)
Future work needs to test other algorithms for determin-
ing age, such as those based on voice, or a multimodal model
that could take both voice and photo input. Our hypothesis is
that this would suffer from the same biases as the image mod-
els and thereby struggle to correctly determine the age of Cook
Islanders.
3. Results
Figure 3 and table 2 show the speech rate per island and age
group. People in Aitutaki appear to speak faster than those in
other islands, but the young and old speak at roughly the same
rate. In Rarotonga, young and old people also appear to speak
at the same rate. On the other hand, younger people in Nga
P¯u Toru appear to speak faster than their elders, and a little bit
faster than the young people in Rarotonga.
Figure 3:Speech rate for different islands and ages.
Table 2:Speech rate per island and age group (moras/second)
Older Younger
Raroronga 6.6±1.6 6.4±2.0
Nga P¯u Toru 6.8±2.8 7.7±2.1
Aitutaki 8.4±2.3 8.7±2.4
1719
These results are confirmed by statistical models. In or-
der to examine the differences between the islands, we used a
linear regression with the interaction of age and island as the
independent factor, and speech rate (in moras per second) as the
dependent variable. There were significant interactions between
age and island (t(8077)=6.1, p<0.0001). A post-hoc test with
a Bonferroni correction revealed that there is no significant dif-
ference between younger and older speakers in Rarotonga (6.4
versus 6.6 moras/second, p=0.73) and in Aitutaki (8.6 versus 8.4
moras/second, p=1.0). However, there is a significant difference
for Nga P¯u Toru (p<0.0001): Younger generations speak faster
(7.7 moras/second) than older generations (6.8 moras/second).
The older people in Rarotonga and Nga P¯u Toru are not sig-
nificantly different in their speech rate (p=1.0), but the young
people in Rarotonga do speak slower than the young people in
Nga P¯u Toru (6.4 versus 7.7 moras per second, p<0.0001). Both
the young and the old people in Aitutaki speak significantly
faster than their age peers on the other islands (p<0.0001).
4. Discussion
The data indicates that, while islands like the Nga P¯u Toru group
behave like languages in previous research (in that younger peo-
ple speak faster), in the other two islands the younger people do
not speak faster. This might be due to language shift. In this sec-
tion we will discuss this possibility, and will comment on some
of the limitations of this method for gathering large corpora for
Indigenous, under-resourced languages.
4.1. Differences in Speech Rate
The first observable pattern is that Rarotonga is the region with
the lowest speech rate. This would be in line with previous
research described in section 1.1, which suggested that popu-
lations with more heritage speakers would have lower speech
rates. Nga P ¯u Toru and Aitutaki have higher degrees of profi-
ciency, which might be correlated with the fact that they also
have higher speech rates.
The younger people in Nga P ¯u Toru speak faster than the
older people. This is in line with the patterns observed in
communities with uninterrupted transmission of the language
across generations. Indeed, in these three islands (Mauke, Mi-
tiaro and Atiu), many young people speak the language as their
L1 and use it in a wide range of domains. On the other hand,
for both Rarotonga and Aitutaki, there is no significant differ-
ence between younger and older speakers. This is in line with
the patterns in heritage or L2 speakers. This situation might
come about because of two reasons: The first one might be
that younger people have a lower proficiency in Cook Islands
M¯aori. We know that, in fact, Rarotonga has the lowest profi-
ciency amongst the islands, and therefore the lower speech rate
for young people might be a reflection of this. Aitutaki has
higher overall proficiency, but the use of the language among
young people has receded in the last 20 years. This might be
the pattern that we see in the data. This mathematical trend cer-
tainly matches the linguistic realities observed on the ground.
A second possibility for these changes might be that
younger people are transferring a slower speaking rate from
English into Cook Islands M ¯aori. Rarotonga and Aitutaki are
the two islands with the most contact with English speakers,
so it might be the case that the speech rate for New Zealand
English (the community that CIM has the most contact with)
was mismatched with the CIM rate from the start, and that
younger people are slowing their speech either because they
are using a slower, English pattern, or because they are mul-
tilingual and speak with a greater degree of pauses in between
code-switching. There is no evidence that New Zealand English
would be slower than Cook Islands M ¯aori, so this second pos-
sibility is less likely that the first one, which connected speech
rate with Indigenous language proficiency and potentially with
its displacement.
4.2. Methodological Considerations for Computational So-
ciophonetics
The most complex part of the project was attempting to con-
nect the raw online data with adequate labels for age. This is
a critical variable in sociophonetic research, but calculating it
is complicated for Indigenous communities. As we expand the
dataset, we will seek to carry out a larger, crowdsourcing effort
to tag images using the intuition of more members of the com-
munity. Given the persistent biases in current AI models, it is
unlikely that the problem of understanding Indigenous faces and
voices will be prioritized in the near future, so this will remain
a challenge for such projects.
One problem that will be difficult to solve in the future is
that of determining the sociolinguistic history of a speaker from
online data. Much like their seafaring ancestors, Cook Islanders
frequently move from island to island, and often have parents
from different islands, complicating the idea that a “speaker”
should be matched to a single island. This would be very diffi-
cult to solve with this data, as only the most basic information
is available, which will limit the type of research that is possible
using this methodology.
Finally, this is an under-resourced language, and we
scrapped every last bit of content that we could. For most lan-
guages of the world, web-scrapping is a very limited way of
collecting corpora [46], and in our case, it would be difficult to
immediately make the dataset grow. We failed to find enough
examples from islands like Mangaia (for which we only found 1
young person), and from the northern islands of Penrhyn, Mani-
hiki and Rakahanga. A full picture of the sociophonetic vari-
ation in Cook Islands M ¯aori will only become available once
extensive fieldwork is performed through the archipelago.
5. Conclusions
In this paper we used a language documentation workflow
(voice activation detection, speech recognition) to gather on-
line data and create a 7.5 hour corpus of Cook Islands M ¯aori
prosodic phrases. This allowed us to calculate the speech rate
of speakers (in moras per second), and to determine that there
are differences both between islands and between generations.
Moreover, these differences might be an echo of the current sit-
uation of language shift in the Cook Islands.
Future work should endeavor to gather data for more is-
lands (e.g. Mangaia, Manihiki and Rakahanga), as well as a
larger number of speakers. This experiment should be repli-
cated when more manually corrected data is available, to fur-
ther test the idea that automatic sociophonetic work can report
trends similar to that in manually cleaned up data. Future work
should look at factors associated with increases or decreases of
speech rate, such as creaky voice. This is particularly interest-
ing because creak has been reported to have a role in CIM, as
a geographically indexed variant of the glottal stop phoneme
[27]. Finally, future work should continue to study the biases
that hinder the adaptation of commercial or large-scale tools to
under-resourced languages spoken by Indigenous communities.
1720
The work of language documentation can greatly benefit from
being accelerated by automatic tools, and finding ways in which
they can be maximally helpful to the efforts of language revi-
talization and normalization would be a boost for this important
work.
6. Acknowledgments
We would like to Cook Islands Television for the permission to
use their recordings in our research, as well as all of the speakers
in our recordings for sharing their time and knowledge with us.
Meitaki! We would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers
of the paper for their useful recommendations.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI Tools were used to aid in the literature review
search, but they were not used for the writing or editing of the
text of the paper.