Learning task-specific subspaces via interventional post-training of speech
foundation models
Jack Cox ID 1,∗∗, Jon P Barker ID 1
1 University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
jbjcox1@sheffield.ac.uk
Abstract
Speech foundation models, pre-trained on large corpora of un-
labelled speech data, produce general-purpose representations
which are useful across tasks. However, these representations
encode information about salient speech variables in a dis-
tributed manner, while downstream speech tasks rely on only
some of this variability. In this work, we propose a post-
training refinement approach using interventional contrastive
learning. By leveraging an interventional dataset and multi-part
contrastive loss, we learn a transformation from the entangled
representation space of speech foundation models into separate
content and speaker subspaces. We evaluate the learnt repre-
sentations on speaker verification and keyword spotting tasks,
showing improved out-of-domain speaker verification perfor-
mance and evidence that speaker and content information are
separated across the learned subspaces.
Index Terms: post-training, speech foundation models, con-
trastive learning
1. Introduction
In recent years, Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has emerged
as an important paradigm for speech tasks, leveraging large
quantities of unlabelled data to train general-purpose represen-
tation models [1]. The representations from these models have
been shown to have strong task generalisability, enabling state-
of-the-art performance on a range of speech tasks with only
lightweight supervised downstream task heads [2]. However,
these representations encode information about many variables
affecting the speech signal in a distributed fashion, while speech
tasks typically rely on only a fraction of the overall variability in
the speech signal. For example, the output of a content task like
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) should not be affected by
who is speaking, or the output of Speaker Identification (SID)
by the words spoken.
Accordingly, a line of research aims to learn task-specific
features, invariant to changes in nuisance variables. Contrastive
learning, which encourages similar data samples to be close
together in representation space and different data samples to
be far apart, has seen use for learning speaker-invariant con-
tent representations [3], and content-invariant speaker represen-
tations [4, 5].
An alternative approach is learningdisentangled represen-
tations[6, 7, 8], where different sources of variability are sepa-
rated in latent space [9]. Early work in disentangled representa-
tion learning considered the problem of non-linear Independent
Component Analysis (ICA), based on twin assumptions of in-
dependence between the variables of interest and Gaussianity
**indicates the corresponding author.
[10]. Unfortunately, these assumptions are unable to guarantee
disentanglement [11, 12], with performance sensitive to random
seed and architecture choices [13].
Recent work in image processing has moved towardscausal
disentanglement[14, 15]. These approaches replace the as-
sumption that the variables of interest are independent with
causally-related variables, and often make use of interventional
data to provide disentanglement guarantees [16, 17, 18, 19].
Such data consists of samples resulting from interventions on
the causal variables which affect the data—the value of one or
more variables is changed, and the causal effect is allowed to
propagate through the system [20].
In this work, we apply this idea to the post-training of
speech foundation models. We propose a novel framework,
interventional contrastive learning, adapting supervised con-
trastive learning to jointly learn multiple task-specific sub-
spaces, enabled by an interventional dataset with only weak la-
bels. These labels accord with intervention targets—for a pair
of samples, which causal variables are intervened on. In con-
trast to standard contrastive learning, this approach learns mul-
tiple embedding spaces, associated with different causal vari-
ables, rather than a single embedding space which is invariant
to all but one variable of interest.
A training dataset is synthesised using a state-of-the-art
zero-shot Text-to-Speech (TTS) system, allowing us to inter-
vene on variables ofcontent(sentence) andspeaker. Using syn-
thetic data has two advantages. First, it allows us to control the
density of interventions present in the dataset—in the best case,
every speaker saying every utterance. Second, an intervention
is particularly intuitive in the synthetic case. Just as we can pic-
ture a real-world setting where interventions arise through an
agent interacting with levers and buttons which are the inputs
to a causal system, we can intervene on the output of the TTS
system by controlling its inputs: a reference audio and a target
text.
The contributions of the work are as follows. First, we in-
troduce a novel contrastive loss, described in Section 2, which
allows us to learn multiple subspaces associated with different
causal variables. Second, we propose a synthetic interventional
dataset, with dense interventions on content and speaker causal
variables. This dataset is described in Section 3. Finally, we ex-
amine the separating capacity of our framework using a minimal
architecture, and evaluation on speaker and content tasks, where
success is measured by increased performance on the matched
subspace and decreased performance on the mismatched sub-
space. The experimental setup is described in Section 4. Sec-
tion 5 discusses the results of our experiments, and the limita-
tions of our approach.
6373
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2542
2. Interventional Contrastive Learning
In contrast to standard supervised contrastive learning, which
operates in a single embedding space, we learn multiple sub-
spaces corresponding to distinct causal variables. In order to
learn these subspaces, we leverage a dataset where, for each
subspace, each sample shares a label with at least one—and of-
ten many—examples (positives), alongside multiple examples
which do not share the same label (negatives). To formulate a
contrastive loss which can handle multiple positives and mul-
tiple subspaces, we extend the multi-positive contrastive loss
from [21, 22] to the problem of interventional contrastive learn-
ing.
Consider a batch of samples with embeddings{z (n)}N
n=1,
where each embedding is partitioned intoJsubspaces
z(n)
1 ,...,z (n)
J , each of which is associated with a causal vari-
ableC j. For each subspacej, we consider the problem of
matching an anchor samplea=z (i)
j , to a set of candidates
{b1,b 2,...,b K}, whereb k =z (k)
j for the non-anchor sam-
ples in the batchk={1,...,N}\i. The likelihood that an
anchor matches each candidate is given by the contrastive dis-
tributionq:
qi,j = exp(a·b i/τ)PK
k=1 exp(a·b k/τ)
(1)
Anchors and candidates are alll 2-normalised, and the tempera-
ture,τ, is a hyper-parameter. A supervision signal is provided
through the ground truth distributionp:
pi,j = Mj,a,bi
PK
k=1Mj,a,bk
(2)
whereM j is a contrastive label for a batch, the binary elements
of which describe which candidates match the anchor sample in
subspacej.
The contrastive loss for subspacejis the cross-entropy be-
tween ground-truth and contrastive distributions:
Lcon
j =−
NX
i=1
pi,j logq i,j (3)
In order to directly penalise similarity between the sub-
spaces, we adopt an orthogonality loss from [23] as a regularis-
ing term. For a full batch of embeddingsZ, the orthogonality
loss between two subspacesjandkis
Lorth
j,k =||Z T
j Zk||2
F (4)
where||·|| 2
F is the squared Frobenius norm.
The overall loss is a weighted sum of the contrastive losses
for each subspace and the orthogonality losses between sub-
spaces:
L=λ con
X
j
Lcon
j +λ orth
X
j
X
k>j
Lorth
j,k (5)
whereλ con andλ orth are weights on the contrastive and orthog-
onality losses, respectively.
3. Synthetic Interventional Dataset
In order to train a model with the objective described in Sec-
tion 2, we require aninterventional dataset, consisting of
speech samples with labelled interventions on the causal vari-
ables of interest,C. Such a dataset could be constructed by
mining large datasets of genuine speech for interventional pairs.
26 46 87 36 41 11
B B26 B46 B87 B36 B41 B11
P P26 P46 P87 P36 P41 P11
V V26 V46 V87 V36 V41 V11
R R26 R46 R87 R36 R41 R11
Content
Speaker
Figure 1:Example of construction of shuffled batches from the
interventional dataset for a batch size of6. Speakers are la-
belled with letters, while content is labelled with numbers. The
first batch is given by the shaded area.
However, we use a synthetic dataset in this work, which can
have every combination of interventions on the causal vari-
ables. Specifically, we consider two causal variables:content
andspeaker. To obtain interventional data over these variables,
we synthesise speech using a zero-shot TTS model, F5-TTS
[24].
We source reference audio for zero-shot synthesis from the
test-clean set of LibriTTS [25].32speakers are included in our
training set, while6make up the development set. For each
speaker, we take a sample of256reference utterances between
3and10seconds in duration. Each of these is used as the refer-
ence audio for one synthesised utterance in the final dataset.
The final dataset combines the256reference utterances for
each of the38speakers with256target texts for the appropriate
subset, also sampled from LibriTTS. These are input to the TTS
system to obtain synthesised utterances with exhaustive combi-
nations of speakers and texts, such that the training set consists
of8192utterances, the development set of1536utterances, and
the two sets share neither speakers nor texts.
Batch construction involves arranging samples in a matrix,
where each row is a speaker and each column is a specific con-
tent. Each batch is a section of this matrix, optimised such that
the batches are as close to square as possible given the batch and
dataset size. The rows and columns of the matrix are re-shuffled
after every training epoch. Figure 1 shows how this batch con-
struction would work for batches of6samples. For training, we
use a batch size of512with16speakers and32contents. The
development set is split into batches of768samples, such that
each batch contains all6speakers.
Interventional labels,L j, indicate where content or speaker
differs between two samples, and are defined for a batch. Con-
trastive labels,M j, are then calculated from the interventional
labels, such that:
Mj =J−L j−I(6)
whereIis the identity matrix andJis the matrix of ones. Ac-
cordingly, we can map from our interventional labels to con-
trastive labels, which provide the supervision signal to the ob-
jective described in Section 2.
4. Experiments
We test our interventional contrastive post-training approach
with the synthetic interventional dataset described in Section 3
for a range of pre-trained models1.
For training, we use the AdamW optimiser and train for50
epochs. We use a one-cycle learning rate scheduler with co-
1https://github.com/mjukus/interventional-post-training-speech
6374
x1, . . . , xT
Frozen Pre-
trained Model
h1, . . . ,h L
Pooling
hutt
Subspace
Network
zc zs
Lcon
c Lcon
s
Lorth
c,s
Figure 2:The architecture of the proposed model.
sine annealing, which performed better on the development set
in initial experiments than constant or plateau-reduction sched-
ulers. We used a maximum learning rate of1×10 −4, starting
percentage of0.1, division factor of25.0and a final division
factor of1×10 3. All experiments were performed on a single
Nvidia A100 GPU, where our models take<2hours to train.
4.1. Architecture
The model we apply to the problem of interventional contrastive
learning consists of three sequential components. First, an ut-
terancex= (x 1,...,x T )is transformed into a sequence of
vectorsH= (h 1,...,h L)by a frozen pretrained speech foun-
dation model, or backbone. The length of this representation is
proportional to the length of the original speech signal. Sec-
ond, a pooling module aggregates the sequence into a single
utterance embedding vectorh utt. Finally, a subspace projection
network transforms this utterance embedding into a representa-
tionz, which is partitioned into subspaces,z j, of equal size.
Figure 2 shows this architecture and the associated terms in the
loss.
We conduct experiments with three popular speech foun-
dation models as backbones. These models are wav2vec 2.0
Base [26], HuBERT Base [27], and WavLM Base [28]. All
three models are based on the Transformer architecture, and are
trained using masked quantised latents on the960hours of Lib-
riSpeech training data [29]. These models showed strong gen-
eralisability across tasks on the SUPERB benchmark [2], sug-
gesting that they encode both speaker and content information
in their latent embeddings, and are therefore appropriate inputs
for our approach.
We use the SUPERB implementations of the pre-trained
models2, and extract features from the last layer of each model.
This results in a sequence of vectors of dimension768, which
are passed to the pooling module.
Based on work showing that mean-pooled representations
from pre-trained speech foundation models perform well [30,
2https://github.com/s3prl/s3prl
31], we use a mean-pooling approach with no trainable parame-
ters. This enables direct evaluation of the effect of the subspace
projection network, without introducing additional parameters.
The subspace projection network (henceforth subspace net-
work) is a3-layer Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), consisting of
an input layer, single hidden layer, and an output layer. This
fully-connected network takes an utterance embedding vector
of dimension768and outputs a embeddingzof the same di-
mension. The hidden dimension is also768—we avoid a bot-
tleneck dimension, because the aim of our approach is learning
a transformation into a space of equal dimension. This is the
smallest MLP without a bottleneck, with a parameter count of
∼1.8M. The produced embedding vector is partitioned into
a content subspacez c and a speaker subspacez s, both of di-
mension384. The overall loss is composed of the contrastive
loss for each of the two subspaces, and the orthogonality loss
between the two subspaces.
4.2. Baselines
We compare our full architecture to a baseline that omits the
subspace network. That is, the representations from this base-
line are the pre-projection utterance embeddingsh utt of our
model, or the result of mean pooling on the appropriate back-
bone. This allows us to evaluate the benefits of the transforma-
tion to subspaces while controlling for all variables except the
architecture and weights of the subspace network.
To quantify the benefit of jointly learning subspaces, we
also compare our model with variants which learn only one
subspace, which we refer to as thecontent onlyandspeaker
onlymodels. These use the same contrastive loss, but are su-
pervised only on interventional labels for one causal variable at
a time. Accordingly, only one subspace is learned and there is
no orthogonality term in the overall loss. To aid comparison
with the full model, the dimension of the output from the sub-
space model is halved (to384), such that the capacity of the
single subspace is the same as the equivalent subspace in the
full model. These models have1.5Mparameters each.
4.3. Evaluation
In order to evaluate the information contained in the learned rep-
resentations for each subspace, we use a cross-evaluation pro-
cedure on two utterance-level downstream tasks—one content
task and one speaker task.
For the speaker variable, we evaluate both learnt subspaces
on Speaker Verification (SV). For a pair of enrollment and
test utterances, SV is a binary classification task, determining
whether the speakers of the two utterances match. Following
common practice in SV, we report the Equal Error Rate (EER)
metric over the V oxCeleb1 test set [32]. However, since we ex-
pect the speaker subspace learned by our subspace model to
resemble a speaker embedding, we do not train a model for
SV. Instead, we consider the case of Out-of-Domain (OOD)
SV, calculating speaker similarity directly on the representa-
tions learnt by our subspace model, compared with the rep-
resentations from the baselines. This is a significantly more
challenging scenario—our synthetic data consists of clean read
speech, while the V oxCeleb data is in-the-wild spontaneous
speech. Success on this task relies on the generalising capac-
ity of the backbone, and that the subspace model learns a data-
agnostic transformation. The latter is a particularly desirable
quality, because it enables us to learn a transformation on one
dataset that is useful across many datasets and tasks. For the
content variable, we evaluate the learnt subspaces on Keyword
6375
Table 1:All metrics are reported in % as the mean (and standard error on the mean) over5seeds, where applicable. The arrows↑and
↓indicate whether a higher or lower value is better for a metric, respectively. Bold font indicates the best performing model for each
backbone in the matched subspace; for the mismatched subspace, the worst performing model is bold instead. An asterisk indicates
baseline results which have been repeated to aid comparison.
Backbone Subspace
Network
Matched Subspace Mismatched Subspace
SV EER↓ KS acc↑ SV EER↓ KS acc↑
Wav2vec 2.0
None 45.5 81.2(0.6) 45.5* 81.2 (0.6)*
Content only - 46.6 (0.4) 44.0 (0.2) -
Speaker only 37.3 (0.1) - - 34.1(0.4)
Full 36.8(0.2) 46.8 (0.5) 43.2 (0.05) 40.3 (0.6)
HuBERT
None 36.4 95.7(0.1) 36.4* 95.7 (0.1)*
Content only - 90.7 (0.2) 43.7(0.1) -
Speaker only 26.9(0.2) - - 83.2(0.6)
Full 27.2(0.5) 89.7 (0.4) 42.6 (0.2) 85.1 (0.3)
WavLM
None 38.7 96.9(0.04) 38.7* 96.9 (0.04)*
Content only - 93.8 (0.1) 44.2(0.1) -
Speaker only 24.6(0.5) - - 81.5(1.2)
Full 24.7(0.2) 93.0 (0.3) 42.5 (0.2) 84.9 (0.5)
Spotting (KS). This task involves recognising known keywords
from other unknown content. We adopt the approach from SU-
PERB, which trains a downstream model consisting of a lin-
ear head and mean pooling on the Speech Commands dataset
[33, 2]. The model is trained using the cross entropy loss to clas-
sify between12classes, including classes for unknown words
and non-speech. We use the Adam optimiser with a learning
rate of0.001, training for30epochs, and report accuracy (acc)
over the test set.
5. Results
Table 1 shows the performance of each backbone and model
combination on the OOD SV and KS tasks. Results are reported
for both the matched subspace (where the representation corre-
sponds to the target variable) and the mismatched subspace.
For all backbones, the speaker subspace from the full model
is substantially better for the OOD SV task than without the
subspace network. The absolute EER for even the best models
remains high at∼25%, when compared with results on the
SUPERB SV task—for example, an EER of4.69% on WavLM
in [2]. However, this result used a5-layer time-delay neural
network and the1211speakers in the V oxCeleb1 training set,
while we train a smaller model on data from just32speakers.
Furthermore, our data is clean, read speech, while V oxCeleb1
is in-the-wild, spontaneous speech. Despite the data mismatch
and small training speaker pool, our best models successfully
separate out speaker information from a pre-trained backbone,
beating the EER of26.51% for non-expert humans reported in
[34].
On the other hand, our learned content subspace is less use-
ful than the pooled backbone representations for KS, indicating
that content information is lost as a result of our contrastive ob-
jective. In order to analyse why this happens, compare the pre-
text task optimised in learning the content subspace with the KS
task. While the contrastive loss encourages similarity between
utterances which are examples of the same sentence, KS in-
volves utterances which contain only single words. There is no
guarantee that the word-level information useful for KS and the
utterance-level information useful for the pretext task coincide
in the pre-trained embedding space. Accordingly, the transfor-
mation learnt by the pretext task may not prioritise word-level
information. Nevertheless, the performance of our best models
on KS remains competitive with the baselines, if less so than for
the speaker subspace.
The gap between SV performance on the matched and mis-
matched subspaces provides evidence that the interventional
contrastive loss does separate speaker and content information
to some degree. The gap for KS is less compelling, with abso-
lute accuracy high for the HuBERT and WavLM backbones on
both matched and mismatched subspaces. This indicates that
either the KS task is possible with limited content information,
or that there is a substantial amount of information leakage be-
tween subspaces. That the models which train subspaces jointly
generally perform better than the single subspace models in
mismatched conditions provides further evidence of informa-
tion leakage.
Across all backbones, there is no evidence of better perfor-
mance from learning content and speaker subspaces jointly. At
the same time, the performance of the single subspace and joint
subspace models is similar, while the joint model has fewer to-
tal parameters than two single subspace models combined. That
might suggest that the joint model uses its subspace network
more efficiently, although further experiments would be needed
to confirm this.
Finally, the models trained on wav2vec 2.0 see consistently
worse performance. This is likely because we use the last layer
of each model—it has been shown that the last layer of wav2vec
2.0 is generally less useful than earlier layers [2, 35]. Future
work should experiment with different layers or a weighted sum
of layers to test this.
6. Conclusion
We propose a novel post-training approach using a multi-part
contrastive loss to learn separate content and speaker subspaces
from interventional data. Our approach increases performance
on OOD SV and beats human performance, despite training
on just32speakers, while maintaining similar performance to
the baselines on the KS task, using just256training utterances
per speaker. However, results suggest that joint learning of the
subspaces does not increase performance over learning the sub-
spaces separately. Further work will look at how the approach
scales to larger, real speech datasets, using different layers of
the pre-trained backbones, and direct penalisation of informa-
tion leakage in the loss.
6376
7. Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the UKRI AI Centre for Doctoral
Training in Speech and Language Technologies (SLT) and their
Applications funded by UK Research and Innovation [grant
number EP/S023062/1] and by Meta. We also acknowledge IT
Services at The University of Sheffield for the provision of ser-
vices for High Performance Computing.
8. Generative AI Use Disclosure
The authors usedGemini ProandGithub Copilot (GPT-4.1)for
technical assistance with programming tasks, as well as in gen-
eration of prototypes for tables and figures in the manuscript.
Generative AI was otherwise not used in the production of the
manuscript.
9. References
[1] A. Mohamed, H.-y. Lee, L. Borgholt, J. D. Havtorn, J. Edin,
C. Igel, K. Kirchhoff, S.-W. Li, K. Livescu, L. Maaløe, T. N.
Sainath, and S. Watanabe, “Self-supervised speech representation
learning: A review,”IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal
Processing, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1179–1210, 2022.
[2] S.-w. Yang, H.-J. Chang, Z. Huang, A. T. Liu, C.-I. Lai, H. Wu,
J. Shi, X. Chang, H.-S. Tsai, W.-C. Huang, T.-h. Feng, P.-H. Chi,
Y . Y . Lin, Y .-S. Chuang, T.-H. Huang, W.-C. Tseng, K. Lakho-
tia, S.-W. Li, A. Mohamed, S. Watanabe, and H.-y. Lee, “A large-
scale evaluation of speech foundation models,”IEEE/ACM Trans-
actions on Audio, Speech, and Languag