Rhythmic Patterning in Vietnamese: The Case of Quadrisyllabic Reduplicative 
Words 
Phuong Dang1 
1 Department of Linguistics, The Ohio State University, The United States 
dang.275@osu.edu 
 
Abstract 
The Vietnamese prosody literature identifies conflicting views 
on the existence of stress, the pattern of a stress unit, and its 
prosodic status . This lack of consensus motivated further 
investigation into rhythmic patterning in Vietnamese. E ight 
native speakers read a list of eight existing morphosyntactically 
head-initial and head -final quadrisyllabic reduplicative words, 
framed in three carrier sentences varying in the number of 
syllables before and after the target word. An iambic pattern 
was observed in syllable duration rather than mean rhyme F0 
and intensity ratio. T he second and fourth syllables were 
significantly longer than the first and third, respectively. 
Different carrier sentences did not change the overall rhythmic 
pattern. These findings support  the presence of word -level 
stress and iambic rhythm, suggesting the possibility of a foot 
domain in Vietnamese. However , they do not support the role 
of morphosyntactic headedness in rhythmic patterning of 
reduplicative words. 
Index Terms : rhythmic pattern, Vietnamese, reduplicative 
words, prosodic structure 
1. Introduction 
Vietnamese belongs to the Mon-Khmer branch of the 
Austroasiatic language family. It is often described as an 
isolating, monosyllabic and tonal language [1, 2, 3], meaning 
that a large proportion of words are one syllable long and each 
syllable is realized with a lexical tone. 
The literature on Vietnamese prosody features an ongoing 
debate on the presence of stress and prominence as well as that 
of prosodic units above syllables, identifying three proposals. 
The first proposal is stress is non -existent in Vietnamese, and 
each syllable in an utterance is pronounced with equal energy 
[4, 5], which implies a syllable -timed rhythm of the language 
and an absence of a stress domain above syllables. Brunelle’s 
experimental study investigated the stress patterns of 
Vietnamese disyllabic compounds, reduplicative words, and 
loan words having different morphosyntactic structures and 
indeed found no prominence asymmetry between their two 
syllables [6]. This finding provides evidence against the 
presence of word-level prominence in Vietnamese.  
Second, stress is present at the phrasal level, and the 
proposals for its domain vary across studies. Thompson [7] 
proposes three levels of stress (heavy, medium, and weak) in a 
pause group of five to eight syllables defined as groups of 
syllables between pauses (p. 50). Trần [8] describes four 
degrees of stress (strong, weak, extra strong, and extra weak) in 
a syntactically determined pause group of one to four syllables. 
Furthermore, the s tress domain in Vietnamese has been 
proposed to be disyllabic and at most trisyllabic with default 
final (iambic) prominence and is formulated regardless of its 
constituents’ morphosyntactic status [9, p. 673]. This proposal 
explicitly refutes the existence of feet and prosodic words above 
syllables and argues that the Vietnamese stress domain holds 
the prosodic status of phonological phrases. Along the same 
lines, Vietnamese participants were found to segment their 
narrative speech into small chunks of one, two, or three 
syllables in which the last syllables were most prominent in 
terms of syllable duration and peak intensity [10].  
Third, stress exists at word level, which suggests an 
intermediate level between syllables and phonological phrases. 
Specifically, stress is described to be morphosyntactically 
determined [1] or have a weak -strong pattern [2] in lexical 
words like disyllabic compounds or reduplicative words. More 
recent experiments reported an iambic pattern in Vietnamese 
disyllabic coordinative words [11] and in disyllabic 
reduplicative words [12]. Notably, Nguyễn [13] extended the 
empirical domain to the rhythmic pattern of reduplicative nonce 
words of two to six syllables. The results showed “polysyllabic 
words in Vietnamese tend to be parsed into bi -syllabic iambic 
feet with a rightward or retrograde rhythmic pat tern” (p. 25), 
mainly observed in syllable duration. She concluded that a 
disyllabic right-headed foot is potentially an intermediate 
prosodic domain between syllables and phonological phrases. 
Another line of research proposes that Vietnamese function 
words like particles or prepositions are reduced in colloquial 
speech [1, 14]. Empirically, they are attached to their preceding 
hosts with the deletion of some segments and retention of tones 
on homorganic nasals or lengthened vowels, which may imply 
the existence of feet or prosodic words [14]. 
This lack of consensus motivates further investigation into 
rhythmic patterning in Vietnamese, which is expected to make 
valuable contributions to the understanding of stress and 
prominence in Vietnamese, as well as the nature of its prosodic 
hierarchy. In this study, I aimed to examine the rhythmic pattern 
of (i) Vietnamese existing quadrisyllabic reduplicative words of 
(ii) different morphosyntactic structures (head -initial versus 
head-final) framed in (iii) three sentence contexts varying in the 
number of syllables before and after the target words. The 
acoustic measures were syllable duration, ratio of mean 
intensity of each syllable rhyme over mean intensity of the 
whole word, and mean F0 of five equidistant points in the 
rhyme.  
Regarding (i), the choice of existing quadrisyllabic words 
was expected to expand the literature on Vietnamese rhythmic 
patterning, which is typically limited to disyllabic lexical words 
[1, 2, 6, 11, 12] and overcome the potential lack of naturalness 
due to the use of polysyllabic nonce reduplicative words in [13]. 
For (ii), following Brunelle [6], I examined the role of 
morphosyntactic headedness in the rhythmic pattern of 
morphologically complex quadrisyllabic reduplicative words. 
Vietnamese quadrisyllab ic reduplicative words are formed 
based on disyllabic words; in other words, disyllabic bases 
undergo either full or partial reduplication to become 
quadrisyllabic reduplicative words; they have intensive 
meanings. These words are head-initial when the bases precede 
the reduplicants or head -final when the bases follow the 
2817
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1508
reduplicants [2, 15]. Therefore, the choice of head-initial and 
head-final quadrisyllabic reduplicative words may help answer 
the question about the role of morphosyntactic headedness in 
Vietnamese rhythmic patterning. Moreover, the phonological 
similarity ensures that all syllables of these reduplicative 
stimuli share the syllable structures, rhymes, and/or tones, 
which helps reduce their effects on the investigated acoustic 
correlates. Finally, regarding (iii), the explicit claim that speech 
in Vietnamese is segmented in chunks of two or three syllables 
regardless of their morphosyntactic structures [9] motivates the 
use of different carrier sentences in the study. If this claim is 
indeed correct, it is expected that differently structured carrier 
sentences can affect phrasing and hence lead to different 
internal prosodic patterns for the target reduplicative words. 
2. Methods  
2.1. Participants 
Participants were eight native Vietnamese speakers (four male 
and four female, age range: 23 – 40, mean age: 28.25). All were 
born and raised in Vietnam and reported to speak Southern 
Vietnamese in their daily communication. 
2.2. Materials 
Materials were eight Vietnamese quadrisyllabic reduplicative 
words: Four were head -initial as exemplified in (1), and four 
were head-final as exemplified in (2). Each syllable of the two 
examples below is marked as BASE or RED depending on 
whether it belongs to the base or reduplicant, respectively. The 
superscripts like C1 or A2 on each syllable represent tones.   
(1) heC1      hɑC1     heA2    hɑA2  
      BASE   BASE  RED   RED   
      ‘very satisfied’ 
(2) leA2     mɑA2     leA2     meA2 
      RED    RED     BASE  BASE 
      ‘very slow’ 
In (1), the disyllabic base he C1 hɑC1 ‘satisfied’ is 
reduplicated into the head-initial quadrisyllabic word heC1 hɑC1 
heA2 hɑA2 ‘very satisfied’  in which the base precedes the 
reduplicant. In (2), the disyllabic base  leA2 meA2 ‘slow’ is 
reduplicated into the head-final quadrisyllabic word leA2 mɑA2 
leA2 meA2 ‘very slow’ in which the base follows the reduplicant.  
All the syllables of each reduplicative word have a CV 
structure whose consonants are the same and vowels are non -
high. The syllables in six out of eight words carry the same tone; 
in the other two, those in the bases have different tones from 
those in the reduplicants. Controlling syllable structure, vowel 
type and tone type was done to minimize their effect on the 
investigated acoustic correlates.  
The eight reduplicative word stimuli were framed in three 
fixed carrier sentences (abbreviated as C1, C2, and C3, 
respectively) varying in the number of syllables before and after 
the target words, as listed in Table 1.  
Table 1. List of three carrier sentences. 
 Carrier sentences 
C1 Nói _____ ngay. ‘Say _____ now.’ 
C2 Hãy nói _____ ngay. ‘Please say _____ now.’ 
C3 Nói _____ cho tôi. ‘Say _____ for me.’ 
 
There is one syllable before and one syllable after the target 
word in the first carrier sentence, two syllables before and one 
syllable after it in the second carrier sentence, and one syllable 
before and two syllables after it in the third carrier sentence. 
The eight quadrisyllabic reduplicative words framed in 
three carrier sentences formed a constructed list of 24 sentences 
which were used as research materials. 
2.3. Procedure 
All recordings were made in a quiet setting . Three participants 
participated via Zoom, and the other five participated in person. 
They sat in a quiet room and wore headphones with built -in 
microphones. All of them were recorded via the Praat software 
[16] with a sampling rate of 44100 Hertz.  After reading the 
consent form and agreeing to participate in the study, the 
participants proceeded to answer demographic questions about 
age, gender, residency, and spoken Vietnamese dialect . Then, 
they read the list of 24 sentences three times. The sentences in 
the list were grouped into three groups based on three carrier 
sentences. 
2.4. Acoustic measurements 
576 reduplicative word tokens (8 words x 3 carrier sentences x 
8 participants x 3 repetitions) were acoustically analyzed. The 
three acoustic measures were syllable duration (measured in 
milliseconds), ratio of mean intensity of each syllable rhyme 
over mean intensity of the whole word, and mean rhyme F0 
(mean of five equidistant points in the rhyme, measured in 
Hertz), all of which are frequently used correlates in research 
on Vietnamese prosody [6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13]. 
2.5. Statistical analysis 
Mixed-effects linear regression models [17] using the lme4 
package in R [18] were employed for statistical analysis. The 
dependent variables were syllable duration, intensity ratio, and 
mean rhyme F0. The fixed effects were syllable position, 
headedness, and carrier sentence. Syllable position refers to the 
first, second, third, and fourth syllables of the quadrisyllabic 
reduplicative words (abbreviated as S1, S2, S3, and S4, 
respectively). Headedness refers to their morphosyntactic 
structures being either head-initial or head-final. Finally, carrier 
sentence refers to three carrier sentences varying in the number 
of syllables before and after the target word. We used maximal 
design-driven random effects structure s for subjects and items 
[19]. The converged model for each dependent variable 
included the three fixed effects, their interaction, random 
intercepts for subjects and items, and random slope of carrier 
sentence for subjects. Treatment coding was employed f or the 
fixed effects with the alphabetically chosen reference levels, 
and statistical significance was evaluated using the F-tests with 
Satterthwaite approximation of degrees of freedom [20].  
3. Results 
3.1. Syllable duration 
Regarding syllable duration, the statistical results showed a 
significant effect of syllable position [F(3,2248.99) = 166.96, p 
< 0.001], the interaction between syllable position and 
headedness [ F(3,2248.99) = 6.34, p < 0.001], and the 
interaction between syllable position and carrier sentence 
[F(6,2248.99) = 0.97, p < 0.001].  
Pairwise comparison based on the estimated marginal 
means showed a significant durational difference among all 
four syllable positions in both headedness patterns. Figure 1 
reports the mean duration of each syllable position of the 
2818
investigated words in two headedness patterns. The first two 
syllables (S1 and S2) and the last two syllables (S3 and S4) are 
paired in an iambic pattern in terms of syllable duration in both 
head-initial and head -final reduplicative words. This suggests 
morphosyntactic headedness does not play a role in rhythmic 
patterning of these reduplicative words.  
 
 
Figure 1: Mean syllable duration of four syllable positions 
in two headedness patterns. Error bars are standard errors of 
by-subject means. 
 
 
Figure 2: Mean syllable duration of four syllable positions 
in three carrier sentences. Error bars are standard errors of 
by-subject means. 
 
  A significant pairwise durational difference among 
syllable positions in three carrier sentences was found except 
the pairs of S1-S4 in the first carrier sentence and S2 -S4 in the 
third carrier. Figure 2 reports the mean duration of each syllable 
position of the investigated words in three carrier sentences. An 
iambic pattern for the investigated quadrisyllabic reduplicative 
words is observed for pairs of S1-S2 and S3-S4 for sentence 
context. Furthermore, across the three sentence contexts, S1, S2 
and S3 in  the first carrier sentence were significantly longer 
than those in the third carrier sentence. It is possible that being 
framed in different carrier sentences did not change the overall 
pattern of the quadrisyllabic reduplicative words but has some 
reduction effect on their syllable duration. 
3.2.  Intensity ratio 
Regarding intensity ratio, statistical significance was found for 
syllable position [ F(3,2249.07) = 56.64, p < 0.001], the 
interaction between syllable position and headedness 
[F(3,2248.99) = 4.06, p < 0.01], and the interaction between 
carrier sentence and headedness [ F(2,2250.91) = 5.14, p < 
0.01]. Pairwise comparison showed the significant difference 
among syllable positions in two headedness patterns except the 
pair of S3 -S4 in head -final words and that of S2-S3 in head-
initial words. Figure 3 reports the mean intensity ratio of each 
syllable position of the investigated words in two headedness 
patterns. A gradual decrease in intensity ratio from S1 to S4 was 
observed for both head-initial and head-final words.  
 
 
Figure 3: Mean intensity ratio (rhyme over whole word) 
for four syllable positions in two headedness patterns. Error 
bars are standard errors of by-subject means. 
3.3. Mean rhyme F0 
 
Figure 4: Mean rhyme F0 of four syllable positions in two 
headedness patterns. Error bars are standard errors of by-
subject means. 
 
Regarding mean rhyme F0, statistical significance was 
found for syllable position [ F(3,2248.94) = 37.55, p < 0.001] 
and the interaction between syllable position and headedness 
pattern [F(3,2249.07) = 12.77, p < 0.001]. Pairwise comparison 
showed the significant difference in the pairs of S1-S2, S1 -S3, 
and S1-S4 in head-final reduplicative words as well as among 
all syllable positions in head-initial words. Figure 4 reports the 
mean rhyme F0 of each syllable pos ition in two headedness 
patterns. It is seen that the first syllable had the highest mean 
rhyme F0 in head -final words whereas there was a gradual 
decrease in mean rhyme F0 from S1 to S4 in head-initial words. 
4. Discussion  
The current study was designed to examine the issues of stress, 
prominence, and prosodic structure in Vietnamese. It examined 
the rhythmic patterns of Vietnamese existing head -initial and 
2819
head-final quadrisyllabic reduplicative words framed in three 
carrier sentences that varied in the number of syllables before 
and after the target word. The acoustic measures were syllable 
duration, ratio of mean rhyme intensity over whole word 
intensity, and mean rhyme F0. 
The general findings provide evidence for the presence of 
an iambic pattern in terms of  syllable duration rather than 
intensity ratio and mean rhyme F0. Specifically, in both head-
initial and head -final quadrisyllabic reduplicative words, the 
second and fourth syllables were found to be significantly 
longer than the first and third ones, res pectively. The iambic 
patterns found for syllable duration were not present for 
intensity ratio and mean rhyme F0. There was a gradual 
decrease in intensity ratio from the first to fourth syllable in 
both headedness patterns. In addition, a gradual decreas e in 
mean rhyme F0 was also observed for head -initial words, 
whereas the first syllable had the highest mean rhyme F0 in 
head-final words. Furthermore, embedding the target 
reduplicative words in three different carrier sentences did not 
change the overall  rhythmic patterns; however, it still led to 
some reduction in syllable duration: the first three syllables of 
words framed in the first carrier sentence (having one syllable 
before and one syllable after the target words) were 
significantly longer than those of words framed in the third 
carrier sentence (having one syllable before and two syllables 
after the target words). 
The finding of an iambic pattern in terms of syllable 
duration but not intensity ratio is consistent with Nguyễn and 
Ingram [11, 12] and Nguyễn [13]. That is, in Nguyễn and 
Ingram [11, 12] , prominence asymmetries between the two 
syllables of Vietnamese disyllabic coordinative compounds and 
reduplicative words manifested in syllable duration rather than 
rhyme intensity. Similarly, Nguyễn’s [13] retrograde iambic 
pattern of Vietnamese polysyllabic reduplicative nonce words 
was observed for syllable duration rather than peak intensity. 
Furthermore, syllable duration has been reported to be the 
clearest acoustic measure of stress in different langu ages [6]. 
Hayes [21] also describes that iambs are prototypically 
characterized by the longer duration of stressed syllables. As 
such, my findings support the existence of stress and 
prominence in Vietnamese, which appears to be most clearly 
realized for syllable duration, as is common for iambic stress 
systems. More importantly, the presence of stress found in the 
study may provide empiric al evidence against proposals that 
assume no stress in the language [4, 5].  
The higher intensity ratio and mean rhyme F0 of the first 
syllables of the reduplicative words in comparison to the other 
three may be the effect of static carrier sentences. In other 
words, the participants may have noticed that the target words 
were embedded in fixed sentences, and that possibly made the 
target words stand out more; in addition, speakers may have 
tended to put an (intermediate) prosodic-phrase boundary 
before the target word. From that perspective, the result may 
also reflect a common crosslinguistic tendency to strengthen the 
initial syllables of prosodic phrases [22, p. 3].  
An iambic pattern in which the second syllables were 
longer than the first and the fourth were longer than the third 
found in both head -initial and head -final quadrisyllabic 
reduplicative words portrays their rhythmic patterns. In 
addition, the similar rhythmic pattern observed in the two 
different headedness patterns suggests that morphosyntactic 
headedness does not play a role in Vietnamese rhythmic 
patterning. These findings are consistent with the finding of a 
weak-strong pattern in disyllabic reduplica tive words [2, 12], 
and of a retrograde iambic pattern in nonce reduplicative words 
of two to six syllables [13]. Two notes should be made here. 
First, these studies [2, 12, 13] have not explicitly investigated 
the role of morphosyntactic headedness, but since my results do 
not show an effect of morphosyntactic structure, the results 
appear to be directly comparable. Second, in my results, the 
second syllables were the longest among the four syllables 
whereas in Nguyễn’s [13] results the last syllable was the 
longest.  
In contrast, the finding of no morphosyntactic effect is 
different from the view that stress in lexical words is 
morphosyntactically determined [1, 8]. Notably, Brunelle [6] 
explicitly tested whether disyllabic words of different 
morphosyntactic structures differ in their prominence but did 
not find any significant differences between the two syllables, 
which is against both the existence of stress and prominence 
and the role of morphosyntactic headedness. Counter to [6], my 
results support the presence of stress and prominence, but they 
confirm Brunelle’s claims that morphosyntactic headedness 
does not seem to play a role.  
A final question concerns the prosodic status of a possible 
stress domain in Vietnamese more generally. The primary aim 
of embedding the reduplicative words in three carrier sentences 
varying in the number of syllables before and after them was to 
examine Schiering et al.’s proposal that a stress domain  in 
Vietnamese is a disyllabic or trisyllabic phrasal unit with 
prominence on the last syllable regardless  of its 
morphosyntactic structure [9]. Therefore, if this proposal was 
supported, it was expected that the internal rhythmic pattern of 
the investigated words may vary in different sentence contexts. 
However, the overall iambic pattern remained identical f or the 
reduplicative words across all carrier sentences. When taken at 
face value, this finding therefore provides evidence against the 
strictly prosodic phrasing [9, 10]. However, this finding may 
also be an artefact of the static carrier sentences, such that the 
participants became aware of these fixed sentences and then 
singled out the target words.  
My result in which the syllables of the quadrisyllabic 
reduplicative words were parsed into disyllabic iambic units is 
consistent with Nguyễn [13]. She investigated the rhythmic 
pattern of Vietnamese polysyllabic nonce reduplicative words 
and found a tendency of coupling disyllabic sequences into 
iambic chunks, suggesting the presence of disyllabic iambic 
feet as prosodic units above syllables in Vietnamese. Therefore, 
my result would also suggest the presence of a disyllabic foot 
domain above the syllable level. However, I remain 
uncommitted regarding the question as to whether the higher 
domain should be a prosodic -word node or a prosodic phra se. 
While my findings suggest the existence of feet above syllables, 
they are inconclusive regarding the precise nature of the 
prosodic domain above feet in Vietnamese. What appears to be 
more obvious is the existence of some kind of iambic rhythmic 
organization within these quadrisyllabic words, which suggests 
the presence of some intermediate level between syllables and 
phonological phrases (counter, e.g., [9]). 
5. Conclusion  
In conclusion, this study aimed to investigate the rhythmic 
pattern of Vietnamese morphosyntactically head -initial and 
head-final quadrisyllabic reduplicative words. T he findings 
support the presence of stress and prominence in Vietnamese, 
but not the role of morphosyntactic headedness in rhythmic 
patterning of quadrisyllabic reduplicative words. The observed 
rhythmic pattern is the parsing of the four syllables of thes e 
words into disyllabic iambic units, suggesting the existence of 
a 