Non-Autoregressive Minimum Bayes’ Risk Decoding
for Fast Speech Recognition
Hiroyuki Deguchi ID 1, Takatomo Kano ID 1, Katsuki Chousa ID 1, Marc Delcroix ID 1
1 NTT, Inc., Japan
hiroyuki.deguchi@ntt.com, takatomo.kanou@ntt.com,
katsuki.chousa@ntt.com, marc.delcroix@ntt.com
Abstract
Non-autoregressive (NAR) decoding generates output tokens
in parallel, making speech recognition faster than autoregres-
sive decoding, which generates them sequentially from left to
right. However, the recognition performance is degraded be-
cause NAR decoding cannot resolve uncertainty by condition-
ing on previously generated tokens. To address this issue, we
propose a novel NAR decoding framework based on minimum
Bayes’ risk (MBR) decoding, termed NAR-MBR decoding, that
maximizes the expected utility calculated from samples drawn
from the output probability of an NAR model rather than max-
imizing the output probability. Notably, by leveraging the na-
ture of NAR models, multiple samples are obtained efficiently
with a single forward computation. Our experiments across
LibriSpeech, Switchboard, AMI, and web presentation corpus
demonstrated that our NAR-MBR decoding outperformed pre-
vious NAR decoding and ran faster than AR decoding.
Index Terms: automatic speech recognition, decoding, non-
autoregressive, minimum bayes risk
1. Introduction
Decoding speed in automatic speech recognition (ASR) is chal-
lenging in real-world scenarios, especially when processing
long speech signals. Most of the recent state-of-the-art ASR
models that have achieved low word error rates (WER) gener-
ate transcriptions in a left-to-right manner, called autoregressive
(AR) decoding, which takes computational time proportional to
the number of output tokens [1–4]. Non-autoregressive (NAR)
decoding addresses the limitations of AR decoding by introduc-
ing an independence assumption and removing the dependency
on previously generated tokens in the output probability, i.e.,
context information [5–8]. This enables multiple tokens to be
generated in parallel, and the number of decoding steps is re-
duced to either one or a constant smaller than the length of the
output sequence, making it faster than AR decoding. Neverthe-
less, there remains a performance gap between AR and NAR
decoding due to the multi-modality problem in NAR decod-
ing [5], which makes it difficult to maintain consistency in prob-
able path selection when transcriptions may have uncertainty
among multiple output paths.
In the field of decision theory, the expected utility theory
(EUT) [9] is often used for decision-making under uncertainty.
In EUT, optimal decisions maximize the expected utility (EU),
where the utility function represents preference relations or de-
sirability. The minimum Bayes’ risk (MBR) framework based
on EUT1 has been widely utilized for both training [10–14] and
decoding [15–19] in ASR and other fields. In particular, MBR
1EU maximization is equivalent to Bayes’ risk minimization.
decoding improves the recognition performance without addi-
tional training by selecting the output sequence that maximizes
the EU, in contrast to the most widely used decoding method,
maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding, which selects the se-
quence that maximizes the output probability. The EU is typ-
ically estimated using the Monte Carlo method, with multiple
output samples drawn from the output probability distribution.
For fast yet high-quality speech recognition, we propose
NAR-MBR decoding that maximizes the EU by using efficient
non-autoregressive sampling. Figure 1 presents an overview of
NAR and our NAR-MBR decoding. NAR-MBR decoding gen-
erates multiple output samples using a non-autoregressive ASR
model and then maximizes the EU based on WER. For esti-
mating the EU, we generate multiple samples drawn from the
output probability distributions of an NAR model utilizing unbi-
ased sampling rather than greedy search. Notably, we efficiently
sample multiple output paths only with a single forward com-
putation by leveraging the independence assumption between
output tokens in NAR models. We then estimate and maximize
the EU using our efficient edit distance computation.
Experiments on LibriSpeech [20], Switchboard [21],
AMI [22], and web presentation corpus showed that NAR-MBR
decoding transcribed speech up to 43.1 times faster than the
beam search of AR decoding using Conformer [1] and achieved
both speed and accuracy improvements, without additional
training, compared to NAR decoding using Mask-CTC [8].
2. Background: Decoding in ASR
LetXbe the input space of ASR models andY :=V ∗ be the
output space, whereV ∗ is the Kleene closure of vocabularyV.
The goal of ASR is to generate a token sequencey∈Yfrom
an input speechx∈X. Output tokensyare converted into the
transcription textσ(y)∈Σ ∗, whereΣ∗ is the Kleene closure of
alphabetΣ, andσ:V ∗→Σ∗ denotes a detokenizing function
that maps a token sequence to its corresponding string.
2.1. Sequence modeling in decoding
Autoregressive decoding.Most ASR models are trained to cal-
culate the output probability ofygivenx, i.e.,p(y|x;θ), where
θdenotes trained parameters. Typically, they find the most
probable path that maximizes the output probability, which is
formulated using the chain rule of conditional probabilities:
pAR(y|x;θ) :=Q|y|
t=1p(yt|x,y <t).(1)
In this autoregressive manner, output probabilities are predicted
sequentially from left to right, conditioned on previously gener-
ated tokens, allowing ambiguities among paths to be resolved.
However, it is time-consuming, especially for long speech sig-
nals, because probabilities must be calculated|y|times.
820
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2971
Encoder+CTC
Input
CTC output probability
Best-path search: Eq. (3)
CTC output tokens
CMLM decoder
Deterministic masking: Eq. (4)
Masked tokens 
CMLM output probability
Greedy search: Eq. (5)
CMLM output tokens
Masked tokens 
(a)NAR decoding in Mask-CTC
Input
CTC output probability
CTC path sampling: Eq. (9)
CTC output tokens 
Probabilistic masking: Eq. (10)
Masked tokens 
Token sampling: Eq. (11)
CMLM output tokens 
Masked tokens 
MBR output tokens
CMLM output probability
Encoder+CTC
EU maximization: Eq. (12)
CMLM decoder (b)Proposed NAR-MBR decoding in Mask-CTC
Figure 1:NAR and NAR-MBR decoding in Mask-CTC atN iter = 1. Differences from NAR decoding are highlighted .
Non-autoregressive decoding.For faster decoding, NAR de-
coding reduces the number of probability calculations. It gen-
erates multiple tokens in parallel, based on the independence
assumption between output tokens, as follows:
pNAR(y|x;θ) :=Q|y|
t=1p(yt|x).(2)
Mask-CTC [8], one of the most popular non-autoregressive
ASR models, is built on an encoder–decoder architecture (Fig-
ure 1(a)), where the encoder concurrently generates the en-
tire output sequence with connectionist temporal classification
(CTC) [6, 23], and the decoder, based on a conditional masked
language model (CMLM) [7], refines the encoder outputs with
mask prediction. The encoder predicts the output probability of
tokens and blanks and greedily selects the CTC alignment path
that maximizes the probability for each frame, as
z
CTC
:= argmax
z∈V ∗
CTC
p(z|x;θ CTC) = argmax
z∈V ∗
CTC
Q|z|
t=1p(zt|x;θ CTC),
(3)
whereV CTC :=V∪{∅}is the CTC output vocabulary of the
encoder and∅denotes a blank frame. CTC then collapses the
alignment pathz CTC by removing all blanks and aggregating
consecutive frames with the same tokens. LetB:V ∗
CTC ↠Y
be a surjective function that maps a CTC path to its correspond-
ing collapsed output sequence. The CTC output sequence is
defined asy CTC :=B(z CTC). The CMLM decoder masks tokens
within the CTC outputy CTC according to its confidence proba-
bilityp(y CTC
t |x;θ CTC), and fills the masked tokens. The masks
m∈{0,1} ∗ are determined with a thresholdα∈[0,1]:
mt :=1[p(y
CTC
t |x;θ CTC)<α],(4)
where1denotes an indicator function. The masked sequence
ymask is obtained by masking the CTC output usingm: ifm t =
1,y t is replaced with the mask token; otherwise, it remains
unchanged. Mask tokens are then filled via mask prediction:
y
CMLM
t :=
(
argmaxyt∈Vp(yt|x,y mask;θ CMLM )m t = 1
ymask
t mt = 0.(5)
The mask prediction can also be split intoNiter∈Z≥0 inference
stages instead of filling all mask tokens at once, at the expense
of decoding speed. Note thatN iter = 0corresponds to using
yCTC without the CMLM. By filling tokens starting with those
of higher confidence, lower WER has been achieved [8].
Mask-CTC corrects erroneous tokens that occur due to
the non-autoregressive manner of the encoder with CTC, and
achieves a better recognition performance than encoder-only
NAR models while reducing the number of probability calcu-
lations and generating outputs faster than AR decoding. Never-
theless, there is still a performance gap between AR and NAR
decoding due to the multi-modality problem [5] caused by the
uncertainty of multiple output paths.
2.2. Decision rules in decoding
MAP decoding.The most widely used output decision rule in
ASR is MAP decoding, which maximizes the output probabil-
ity. Since the output spaceYis an infinite set and searching over
all possible paths is infeasible, it selects a pruned hypothesis set
H⊂Y, usually obtained via beam search or sampling:
y
MAP
:= argmaxh∈Hp(h|x;θ).(6)
This point estimation strategy can pose problems, and recent
studies have shown that high-probability sequences are not al-
ways high-quality. Specifically, as the beam size increases, se-
quences with higher probability are generated. However, such
sequences hurt output quality and sometimes cause pathological
outputs, e.g., empty outputs andn-gram repetitions [24, 25].
MBR decoding.As a more quality-aware decision rule, MBR
decoding selects the hypothesisy MBR that maximizes the EU:
y
MBR
:= argmaxh∈H Ey∼Pr(·|x)[u(h;y)],(7)
wherePr(·|x)is the true output probability distribution given
the inputx, andu:Y×Y→Ris the utility function, which
satisfiesh⪰ y h′⇐⇒u(h;y)≥u(h ′;y), where⪰ y denotes
the preference relation under the given referencey. Typically,
evaluation metrics to be maximized, e.g., negative WER, are
used for the utility function. SincePr(·|x)is unknown, the
EU is commonly estimated with the Monte Carlo (MC) method
using output samples drawn from the modelθ[19, 26]:
y
MBR
≃argmax h∈H
1
|R|
P
y∈Ru(h;y),(8)
whereR :={y i}|R|
i=1
i.i.d.
∼p(·|x;θ)is a multiset of sam-
ples, called pseudo-references, which are drawn from the output
probability distribution. To estimate the EU stably, unbiased
sampling methods are used for generating pseudo-references
rather than beam search or other biased sampling methods [26,
27]. In a typical setting, the same sample set is used for both
the hypotheses and the pseudo-references. MBR decoding ro-
bustly generates high-quality outputs but is computationally ex-
pensive due to hypothesis and pseudo-reference sampling and
the quadratic-time utility calculation.
821
3. Proposed Method: NAR-MBR Decoding
Our non-autoregressive minimum Bayes’ risk (NAR-MBR) de-
coding aims to decode high-quality transcriptions significantly
faster than AR decoding, without additional training for Mask-
CTC. Figure 1(b) presents the overview of NAR-MBR decod-
ing. It mainly consists of two steps: (1) probabilistic unbiased
sampling from Mask-CTC, and (2) efficient EU maximization.
3.1. Probabilistic unbiased sampling from Mask-CTC
We sample hypotheses and pseudo-references from the output
probability distribution of Mask-CTC. As described in Sec-
tion 2.2, MBR decoding requires unbiased sampling to gener-
ate pseudo-references, which is usually computationally expen-
sive. While Mask-CTC generates CTC paths via fast but biased
greedy search, we instead perform unbiased sampling without
additional cost to obtain multiple CTC alignment paths.
We first sample multiple CTC paths. Notably, this step does
not increase the computational cost. In AR models, sequence
sampling increases the computational cost by the number of
samples, as it calculates context-dependent conditional proba-
bilities. Here, we sample sequences from NAR models, i.e.,
from context-independent probabilities. Since the probabilities
are computed in a single forward pass, multiple samples can
be obtained efficiently. The paths are sampled independently
according to the output probabilities for each frame:
Z :={z i}|Z|
i=1
i.i.d.
∼p(z|x;θ CTC), z i,t∼Cat (p(z t|x;θ CTC)),
(9)
whereZis a multiset of sampled CTC alignment paths and
Cat(·)denotes a categorical distribution. We then perform
mask prediction for eachz i∈Z. The masks are sampled from
Bernoulli distributions based on the confidence probabilities:
mi,t∼Bernoulli
 
1−p(y
CTC
i,t|x;θ CTC)

.(10)
Unconfident tokens are masked according tom i, the same as in
the previous method. We then fill in the masked tokens based on
the categorical distribution of the decoder’s output probabilities.
y
CMLM
i,t :=
(
yi,t∼Cat
 
p(yt|x,y mask
i ;θ CMLM )

mi,t = 1
ymask
t mi,t = 0.
(11)
Similar to standard decoding in Mask-CTC, our method can
also extend mask prediction toN iter inference stages. To proba-
bilistically fix output tokens from higher confident ones, we use
the Gumbel-max trick [28] instead of top-k.
Using the above method, a sample set for pseudo-references
Ris obtained. Following previous studies [19, 26], we use the
same set for both hypothesesHand pseudo-referencesR. For
Niter = 0, CTC path samplesZare directly used asHandR.
3.2. Efficient EU maximization
We select the best sequence that maximizes the EU from the
hypotheses based on Equation (8). For the utility functionu, we
employ negative WER, i.e.,u(h;y) =−WER(σ(h);σ(y)),
whereWER: Σ∗×Σ∗→[0,∞)calculates a WER score given
a reference transcriptionσ(y). The output is thus obtained as
y
MBR
≃argmax h∈H− 1
|R|
P
y∈R WER(σ(h);σ(y)).(12)
Estimating the EU for all hypotheses requires a quadratic time
proportional to the number of samples. To maintain the speed
benefit gained by using NAR models, we efficiently calculate
the EU and mitigate the speed reduction due to MBR decoding.
Removing longest common prefix and suffix.Removing the
longest common prefix and suffix between a hypothesis and a
pseudo-reference does not affect the edit distance. We thus re-
move them before the calculation to reduce sequence lengths.
Memorization.By caching the scores of duplicate sample
pairs, we reduce the number of utility function calls. Since
pseudo-references are sampled as a multiset, it sometimes con-
tains duplicate samples. We first extract unique hypotheses and
pseudo-references, calculate and cache the occurrence counts
and scores of unique hypothesis–pseudo-reference pairs, and
reuse the cached results for duplicate pairs.
Parallelization.We calculate scores for each unique pair in
parallel by leveraging multiple CPUs.
Implementation.We implement WER in Rust, including text
normalization. In the edit distance calculation, we convert
words tou32word IDs to avoid expensive string comparisons.
4. Experiments
4.1. Setup
To confirm the effectiveness of NAR-MBR decoding, we evalu-
ate recognition performance and decoding speed in ASR tasks.
Datasets.We use LibriSpeech [20], Switchboard (SWBD) [21],
AMI [22], and web presentation corpus (Web). The Web cor-
pus consists of 346 hours of training data from 1,938 speakers,
and 3.7 hours of development and test sets, each from 16 speak-
ers. LibriSpeech consists of “Clean” and “Other”, and SWBD
consists of “Switchboard (Swbd)” and “Callhome (Callhm).”
Models.We use Conformer [1] for AR decoding and Mask-
CTC [8] for both NAR and NAR-MBR decoding. We train
the models with the default hyperparameters for each dataset,
as defined inESPNet[29]. The only differences between the
models are the architectures and loss functions, i.e., the number
of model parameters and other hyperparameters are the same.
Decoding.For AR decoding, we use joint decoding with
CTC [30, 31] and set the CTC weight to 0.3. We compare the
beam widths of 1 (Greedy) and 10 (Beam). For NAR decoding,
we useα= 0.999[8] as the masking threshold. In NAR-MBR
decoding, we compare the sampling sizes|Z|∈{64,256}in
Equation (9). In NAR and NAR-MBR decoding, we compare
the number of inference iterationsN iter ∈ {0,1,10}, where
Niter = 0directly generates transcriptions from the CTC out-
puts without the CMLM decoder.
Evaluation metrics.We evaluate recognition performance us-
ing WER. We also conduct a statistical significance test using
paired bootstrap resampling [32,33] with 1,000 resamples, com-
paring NAR-MBR decoding with the baseline NAR decoding.
Efficiency evaluation.For evaluating decoding speed, we cal-
culate the gain for each decoding method relative to Beam de-
coding (Speedup). Specifically, we measure the total wall-clock
time for forward computation in the encoder and decoder, in-
cluding utility calculation time in NAR-MBR decoding. We do
not include other processing times, such as model and data load-
ing, in the measurement. In addition, we measure the ratio of
average GPU memory usage relative to Beam decoding (Mem).
Computational environments.We use 8 cores of Intel ®
Xeon® Gold 6346 CPU @ 3.10GHz and an NVIDIA ® RTX™
6000 Ada GPU. In all experiments, we employESPNet[29]
for training models andmbrs[34] for MBR decoding.
822
Table 1:Comparison of WER for each decoding method.Bold
and underlined texts indicate the best and second-best WER, re-
spectively, among NAR and NAR-MBR decoding. “†” indicates
that NAR-MBR decoding significantly outperforms NAR decod-
ing for allN iter∈{0,1,10}(p<0.05).
LibriSpeech SWBD
Decoding Clean Other Swbd Callhm AMI Web
AR
Greedy 3.0 6.0 6.9 13.9 17.8 8.2
Beam 2.4 5.5 6.6 13.5 17.0 7.3
NAR
Niter = 0 3.3 7.4 7.9 15.7 18.9 7.7
Niter = 1 3.4 7.7 7.8 15.6 18.8 8.9
Niter = 10 3.3 7.5 7.6 15.2 18.4 8.5
NAR-MBR with|Z|= 64(ours)
Niter = 0 3.3 7.4 7.8 15.6 18.7 †7.6
Niter = 1 †3.1 †7.1 †7.3 †14.9 †18.1 †7.4
Niter = 10 †3.1 †7.1 †7.4 †14.9 †18.1 †7.4
NAR-MBR with|Z|= 256(ours)
Niter = 0 3.2 7.4 7.7 15.5 18.6 †7.5
Niter = 1 †3.1 †7.0 †7.3 †14.9 †18.1 †7.3
Niter = 10 †3.1 †7.0 †7.3 †14.9 †18.1 †7.3
4.2. Results
Recognition performance.Table 1 lists the WER for each
decoding method. In all datasets, NAR-MBR decoding con-
sistently outperformed NAR decoding for both|Z|= 64and
256whenN iter ∈ {1,10}, with statistically significant im-
provements. Notably,N iter = 1significantly improved WER
compared to NAR decoding and achieved a comparable perfor-
mance to beam search in the Web corpus.
In the comparisons within NAR-MBR decoding, we ob-
served two trends. First, increasing the sample size improved
the WER, slightly. This is because the EU is estimated more
robustly as the number of pseudo-references increases, owing
to the nature of the Monte Carlo estimation in MBR decod-
ing. Second, a larger number of inference iterationsN iter did
not improve recognition performance. Interestingly, the WER
of NAR-MBR decoding converged atN iter = 1and did not im-
prove with a largerN iter, while NAR decoding did so. In NAR
decoding, as the number of CMLM decoder calls increases, the
condition of mask prediction becomes richer, making it easier
to resolve ambiguities. In contrast, in NAR-MBR decoding, EU
maximization serves this role instead. In addition, EU estima-
tion requires unbiased samples rather than the most probable
output, and we can obtain a sufficient number of such samples
with a single forward computation. Therefore, NAR-MBR de-
coding achieved low WER without iterative refinement.
To summarize, we observed that NAR-MBR decoding out-
performed NAR decoding and peak performance was achieved
atN iter = 1for both|Z|= 64and256.
Decoding speed.Table 2 shows the comparisons of decoding
speed and average GPU memory usage. We omitted the re-
sults ofN iter = 10in NAR-MBR decoding since peak WER
was achieved atN iter = 1, as shown in Table 1. The results
demonstrate that NAR-MBR decoding consistently ran faster
than AR decoding, including Greedy decoding. In particular,
in the Web corpus, NAR-MBR decoding atN iter = 1ran 43.1
and 20.7 times faster than Beam decoding in|Z|= 64and256,
respectively, while maintaining a comparable WER. Moreover,
compared to NAR decoding atN iter = 10, NAR-MBR decod-
Table 2:Decoding speed and average GPU memory usage
on LibriSpeech (LS) and Web, relative to Beam. Results of
Niter = 10in NAR-MBR decoding are omitted since peak WER
was achieved atN iter = 1, as shown in Table 1.
LS (Clean) LS (Other) Web
Decoding Speed↑ Mem↓ Speed↑ Mem↓ Speed↑ Mem↓
AR
Greedy ×5.3 ×1.0 ×5.2 ×1.0 ×5.0 ×1.0
Beam ×1.0 ×1.0 ×1.0 ×1.0 ×1.0 ×1.0
NAR
Niter = 0 ×61.3 ×1.0 ×50.1 ×1.0 ×90.3 ×1.0
Niter = 1 ×44.2 ×1.0 ×34.7 ×1.0 ×71.3 ×1.0
Niter = 10 ×21.3 ×1.0 ×15.2 ×1.0 ×26.7 ×1.0
NAR-MBR with|Z|= 64(ours)
Niter = 0 ×38.7 ×1.0 ×32.1 ×1.0 ×75.2 ×1.0
Niter = 1 ×27.4 ×1.3 ×22.4 ×1.3 ×43.1 ×1.8
NAR-MBR with|Z|= 256(ours)
Niter = 0 ×30.9 ×1.0 ×22.1 ×1.0 ×41.1 ×1.0
Niter = 1 ×11.8 ×2.7 ×9.7 ×2.4 ×20.7 ×5.0
1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 2561 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 2561 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 2561 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256
|Z|
6
7
8
9WER
NAR-MBR
NAR
Greedy
Beam
Figure 2:WER of NAR-MBR decoding atN iter = 1when vary-
ing number of samples in dev. set (Other) of LibriSpeech
ing with 64 samples atN iter = 1was faster, yet it significantly
improved the WER. The memory usage of NAR-MBR decod-
ing was comparable to that of other methods whenNiter = 0but
increased whenN iter = 1, primarily due to the computational
cost of the CMLM decoder. Addressing this issue through more
memory-efficient sampling will be part of future work.
4.3. Effect of the number of samples
We investigate the effect of the number of samples|Z|on the
recognition performance in NAR-MBR decoding. Figure 2
shows the WER when varying the number of samples within
|Z| ∈ {20,...,2 8}in the development set of LibriSpeech
(Other). The results show that NAR-MBR decoding improved
the WER as the number of samples increased. In addition,
the gain of NAR-MBR decoding converged in|Z|≥64and
showed a similar trend to existing theoretical analyses of con-
vergence rate in autoregressive MBR decoding [35, 36].
5. Conclusion
This paper proposes NAR-MBR decoding for fast speech
recognition. The proposed method addresses the performance
degradation of NAR decoding via probabilistic sampling and
EU maximization. Experimental results demonstrated that
our NAR-MBR decoding outperforms previous NAR decoding
without additional training, and achieves a better trade-off be-
tween recognition performance and decoding speed. For future
work, we will extend our approach to other models and tasks.
823
6. Generative AI use disclosure
Our use of generative AI tools was limited to proofreading, such
as grammar and spell-checkers. All implementations, experi-
ments, and analyses were conducted by the authors, who take
full responsibility for the content.