Learning to Evade: Adaptive Attacks on Audio Watermarking
Weikang Ding∗1, Hanqing Guo2, Rui Duan1, Guangjing Wang3, Yuanda Wang4, Mingzhe Chen5,
Qiben Yan4
1 University of Missouri-Kansas City, USA
2 University of Hawaii at Manoa, USA
3 University of South Florida, USA
4 Michigan State University, USA
5 University of Miami, USA
wdhhd@umkc.edu, qyan@msu.edu
Abstract
Advances in generative audio have intensified copyright con-
cerns, making audio watermarking increasingly important for
asserting ownership. However, existing audio watermarking
methods are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. We find that
watermark decoder message probabilities follow normal distri-
butions, a property exploited by defenses to detect manipula-
tions. This paper introduces an adaptive audio watermark attack
method (AWM) designed to bypass existing defense strategies.
AWM uses a two-stage optimization: the first stage ensures at-
tack success, while the second improves audio quality. To evade
detection, it estimates normal distribution parameters from lim-
ited samples of the target audio, and then adaptively steers de-
coded probabilities back into the estimated range. Evaluated on
two watermarking methods across three voice datasets, AWM
achieves high success while bypassing state-of-the-art detec-
tors: detection rates are below 10% for replacement and cre-
ation, and 0% for removal.
Index Terms: Audio watermark, outlier detection, adaptive at-
tack
1. Introduction
In recent years, the rapid growth of social networking plat-
forms has encouraged many users to publicly share their audio
content, including original works such as audiobooks and self-
produced music. These audio contents might bring them in-
come. However, many unauthorized users copy creative works,
modify them, and re-upload them to mainstream platforms for
profit, which significantly discourages original audio creators.
Besides, voice cloning attacks can illegally synthesize the tar-
get’s voice for malicious purposes, potentially resulting in se-
vere consequences such as financial losses and reputation dam-
age [1].
To address these issues, deep-learning-based watermarking
has been proposed [2]. It embeds a noise-tolerant signal into
the target audio, which remains imperceptible to human hear-
ing while being detectable by specialized AI models. Accord-
ingly, most approaches adopt an encoder–decoder architecture
to embed and recover the signal. To improve robustness, train-
ing pipelines incorporate training data from distortion attack
models, e.g., re-recording [3], voice cloning [4, 5], and lossy
codec compression [6], such that the watermark could survive
common real-world transformations.
However, the robustness of deep-learning-based audio wa-
termarking methods against adversarial attacks remains a crit-
*Research was performed at Michigan State University.
c. Watermark Removal
a. Watermark Replacement
b. Watermark Creation
Watermarked 
Audio
Different 
Watermark
Clean Audio
Without 
Watermark
Attacker
Attacked?
YES
No
Defender
Watermark Attack 
Detection
Perturbation
Deploy
Perturbation
Attacker New 
Watermark
Perturbation
AttackerWatermarked 
Audio
Figure 1:Overview of the watermark attack (left) and the water-
mark attack detection process used to detect whether the audio
has been tampered with (right).
ical concern [7]. Recent studies [8, 9] show that attackers can
remove or forge watermarks by embedding carefully crafted ad-
versarial perturbations. These attacks operate by adding and
optimizing a perturbation signal so that the watermark decoder
is misled into producing incorrect outputs. Yet, existing attack
strategies face the following challenges:
C1:How to design an attack method to balance audio qual-
ity and attack effectiveness?The encoder ensures the watermark
is imperceptible, while the decoder recovers the watermark un-
der various distortions. In practice, the decoder is more publicly
accessible and therefore becomes the primary source of model
knowledge in most attack scenarios. However, deceiving the
decoder may introduce certain noise artifacts. An overly ag-
gressive attack can significantly degrade audio quality, while
prioritizing perceptual quality may compromise attack success.
As a result, it is essential to strike a balance that ensures suffi-
cient attack effectiveness while preserving audio quality.
C2:How to design an attack to bypass the detection strat-
egy?For a given audio input, the decoder outputs both a binary
message and the associated bit-wise probabilities. These prob-
abilities tend to follow a normal distribution, and defenders can
leverage this property to detect whether an audio sample has
been tampered with. Consequently, after successfully altering
the binary watermark message bits, attackers must further opti-
mize the audio to ensure that the decoded message probabilities
fall within the range classified by the defender as non-outliers.
C3:How to select the suitable audio samples to estimate
the decoded message probability distribution?To estimate the
3032
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-814
distribution parameters required for a successful and stealthy
attack, they must instead rely on querying and analyzing the
decoder’s outputs. Because different input samples induce dif-
ferent probability patterns, the parameters estimated by the at-
tacker can diverge significantly from the defender’s true pa-
rameters, and this mismatch can ultimately lead to attack fail-
ure. Therefore, it necessitates designing an effective estimation
strategy to improve the attack success rate.
In this paper, we propose AWM, an Adaptive audio Wa-
terMark attack method, which is capable of bypassing the de-
fender’s detection strategy. Figure 1 illustrates the application
scenarios. The attacker obtains the target audio and adds an
adversarial perturbation to generate the perturbed audio. The
defender then receives the perturbed audio and uses the water-
mark decoder to extract the message probabilities. A predefined
set of distribution parameters is employed to detect outliers. If
any outliers are identified, the audio is classified as “attacked”;
otherwise, it is considered “clean”. We propose three schemes
to address the challenges above.
To addressC1, we design a two-step attack framework.
The first step focuses on maximizing attack effectiveness while
evading the defender’s detection strategy. The second step aims
to improve audio quality. Inspired by [10], we introduce a
threshold-based post-processing step that refines the perturba-
tion to enhance audio quality, while constraining the decoded
message probabilities to remain within the expected normal
range.
To addressC2, we develop an adaptive optimization strat-
egy that explicitly steers the decoded message probabilities to-
ward the estimated normal distribution range. The key idea is
to prioritize optimization on probabilities that fall outside this
range: if a perturbed bit probability already lies within the esti-
mated normal region, its optimization weight is reduced. This
yields a dynamic optimization process that concentrates on the
most “at-risk” binary message bits.
To addressC3, we leverage the observation that data with
similar feature distributions tend to produce similar decoded
message probability distributions [11, 12]. Accordingly, we es-
timate the required probability distribution parameters by col-
lecting a limited set of audio samples whose features closely
resemble those of the target audio.
In this paper, we make the following contributions:
• We empirically demonstrate that the decoded message prob-
abilities output by the watermark decoder tend to follow nor-
mal distributions. This statistical property can be leveraged
by defenders to design detection strategies based on outlier
detection.
• We propose AWM, an adaptive audio watermark attack
method that supports three attack types. Through a two-
step optimization framework, AWM can bypass distribution-
based detection strategies and preserve audio quality. The
adaptive optimization strategy focuses updates on the mes-
sage bits with the most uncertain probabilities, further im-
proving attack effectiveness.
• We evaluate AWM on three speech datasets and two
state-of-the-art watermarking models. Compared to base-
line methods, AWM achieves superior performance in
both Attack Success Rate (ASR) and Detection Success
Rate (DSR). Moreover, even after applying five no-box
perturbations, AWM consistently maintains a high ASR,
with most scores approaching or reaching 100%.The
source code and demos are available onhttps://
adaptiveaudiowmattack.github.io/
2. Related Work
Deep Learning-Based Audio Watermarking.Unlike tradi-
tional schemes [13], which rely on predefined transformations,
deep-learning-based schemes can learn complex feature repre-
sentations and optimize watermarking dynamically [4, 5, 14,
15, 16]. These schemes follow the architecture of the Encoder-
Distortion-Decoder. The encoder embeds the watermark into
the audio and generates the watermarked audio, the decoder re-
ceives the watermarked audio and extracts the corresponding
watermark, and the distortion simulates a variety of potential at-
tack scenarios. This paper implements the defense mechanism
and attack strategy by utilizing this scheme.
Audio Watermark Attack.Audio watermark attacks based on
adversarial perturbations can be categorized as no-box, black-
box, or white-box, depending on the attacker’s knowledge of
the watermarking model. In no-box perturbations, the attacker
relies on generic audio processing techniques (e.g., compres-
sion [17], voice conversion [18, 19], and text-to-speech [20,
21]). In black-box perturbations, the attacker can query the wa-
termarking detector but does not have access to its internal ar-
chitecture or parameters [22, 23] . In white-box perturbations,
the attacker has full access to the detector, including its architec-
ture and parameters, and introduces a perturbation to perform
the gradient-based attack [24, 25]. While some existing stud-
ies [9, 26, 8] are either easily detected or generate the perturbed
audio with poor quality. In this paper, we focus on balancing
the attack effectiveness and audio quality.
Audio Watermark Attack Detection.Adversarial examples
and watermarks both achieve the desired goal by adding im-
perceptible noise. Different from adversarial examples, adding
watermarks to objects has little impact on the performance of
the model inference (such as audio classification models [27]
and speech recognition models [28]). Therefore, some outlier
detection methods based on the time series [29, 30] are ineffec-
tive for identifying whether an audio sample has been tampered
with. Recent studies have explored detection methods for gen-
erated images [31, 32], watermark images [12, 26], and audio
deepfake [33, 34]. However, to the best of our knowledge, these
approaches cannot be directly applicable to detecting audio wa-
termark attacks.
3. Background
3.1. Preliminary
Adding perturbations to the audio is a common strategy for at-
tacks against watermarking systems. The core idea is to either
destroy the original watermark or forge a new one by introduc-
ing perturbations that deceive the watermark decoder.
Audio Watermark Decoder .The audio watermark decoder
Dec(·)takes the encoded audio as input and outputs the ex-
tracted message. The extracted message can be represented in
two forms: a binary message and message probabilities. The
binary message is a direct representation of the decoded output
as a sequence of 0s and 1s, denoted asm∈{0,1} N . The mes-
sage probabilities provide the decoder’s confidence values for
each bit, indicating the likelihood of the bit being 1 or 0. A pre-
defined thresholdθis used to convert probabilities into binary
message values: if a probability exceeds the threshold, the bi-
nary message bit is decoded as 1; otherwise, it is decoded as 0.
The form of message probabilities can be written as:
p=Dec(s), (1)
wheresis clean or watermarked audio,Dec(·)is the watermark
3033
decoder.
Lets c denote clean audio ands w denote watermarked au-
dio. The watermark decoderDec(·)extracts the clean message
probabilitiesp c froms c and the watermarked message proba-
bilitiespw fromsw, respectively. The attacker specifies a target
message probability, denoted asp t. A perturbationδis intro-
duced to perform the attack on the audio.
Watermark Replacement.In watermark replacement, a per-
turbationδis added to the watermarked audios w, deceiving
the decoder into misclassifying the embedded watermark as a
different one. Formally, the goal of watermark replacement is:
δreplacement = arg min
δ
∥Dec(sw +δ)−p t∥.(2)
Watermark Creation.Watermark creation involves adding a
perturbationδto a clean audios c to generate a perturbed wa-
termarked audio, which deceives the watermark decoder into
recognizing it as containing a valid watermark. Formally, the
goal of watermark creation is:
δcreation = arg min
δ
∥Dec(sc +δ)−p t)∥.(3)
Watermark Removal.Watermark removal is an untargeted at-
tack aimed at removing the embedded watermark. We introduce
a watermark detector,Detector(·), which determines whether
the audio contains a watermark. A perturbationδis added to the
watermarked audios w to mislead the detector into classifying
the perturbed audio as unwatermarked (i.e., clean). Formally,
the goal of watermark removal can be expressed as:
δremoval = arg min
δ
∥δ∥s.t.Detector(s w +δ) =None.(4)
3.2. Message Probability Distribution
Benign Data Distribution.The watermark decoder outputs
the message probabilities for each binary message bit. A bit
is decoded as 1 if its probability exceeds a predefined threshold;
otherwise, it is decoded as 0. For both clean and watermarked
audio, we observe two distinct distributions, each following a
normal distribution pattern. Clean audio exhibits a unimodal
normal distribution, with the peak density centered near the pre-
defined threshold. Specifically, in the Timbre, message proba-
bilities below 0 are decoded as 0, while message probabilities
above 0 are decoded as 1. As shown in Figure 2(a), where the
threshold is set to 0, the meanµof the distribution is also close
to 0. In contrast, the watermarked audio follows a bimodal, ap-
proximately normal distribution (Figure 2(b)), with two peaks
corresponding to the decoded binary message values 0 and 1.
Audio Watermark Attack Distribution.For existing water-
mark attack methods [8], we observe that the distributions of
message probabilities deviate significantly from the benign data
distributions. Figure 3(a) illustrates the distribution of message
probabilities under watermark removal attacks. Compared to
Figure 2(a), the message distribution under attack differs in the
range of message probabilities along the x-axis, even though
it still exhibits a unimodal normal distribution. Figure 3(b)
presents the distribution of watermark creation attacks. Here,
most message probability values cluster around the threshold
value of0. In contrast to the clear bimodal normal distribution
shown in Figure 2(b), the distribution resulting from the attack
visually diverges from the benign data distribution.
3.3. Threat Model
The attackers perform watermark attacks to either claim new
copyright ownership or remove the original copyright. We as-
0.4
 0.2
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
Message Probabilities
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0Density
Distribution of Message Probabilities
(a) Normal distribution with clean
audio (Timbre).
1.0
 0.5
 0.0 0.5 1.0
Message Probabilities
0
2
4
6
8
10Density
Distribution of Message Probabilities
(b) Normal distribution with wa-
termarked audio (Timbre).
0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.58
Message Probabilities
0
5
10
15
20
25Density
Distribution of Message Probabilities
(c) Normal distribution with clean
audio (AudioSeal).
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Message Probabilities
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14Density
Distribution of Message Probabilities
(d) Normal distribution with wa-
termarked audio (AudioSeal).
Figure 2:Distribution of benign message probabilities.
5
 0 5 10 15
Message Probabilities
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30Density
Distribution of Message Probabilities (Removal)
(a) Message distribution under
watermark removal attack.
0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Message Probabilities
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6Density
Distribution of Message Probabilities (Creation)
(b) Message distribution under
watermark creation attack.
Figure 3:Distribution of message probabilities under attacks
(Timbre). We use the AudioMarkBench to perform the attacks.
sume that: 1) attackers have no access to the data used by de-
fenders to fit the distribution, nor to the audio dataset used to
train the watermarking model; 2) they have no access to the
ground-truth watermark message embedded in the target audio;
but they can get the message probabilities from the watermark
decoder, allowing them to perform gradient-based attacks; 3)
they do not possess the complete watermarking model, but they
can embed watermarks into a small set of clean audio samples;
4) they are aware that the decoded message probabilities output
by the watermark decoder follow a normal distribution, but they
do not know the corresponding mean and standard deviation.
The defenders are the attack detectors, who identify
whether audio has been tampered with. We assume that: 1)
defenders have access to a large number of ground-truth audio
samples, which are used to fit a normal distribution and estimate
the mean and variance via maximum likelihood estimation; 2)
the watermarking model is publicly available through an online
platform for commercial use, with a limit on the number of wa-
termarked audio samples that each user can generate per day.
4. Methodology
In this section, we first introduce a detection method based on
outlier detection to identify if the given audio sample has been
attacked. Second, we design our adaptive attack, which aims to
achieve a successful attack while preserving perceptual quality.
Meanwhile, we describe the adaptive optimization process for
the three attack types.
3034
Detect
Perturbed
Audio
Outlier Detection
Attacked?
GT Audio
Estimate
Deploy
Watermark 
Decoder
Predicted 
Distribution
Output
Message 
Probabilities
YES
No
Watermark 
Decoder
Message 
Probabilities
Deploy Output
a. Distribution-Based Detection Design
b. Hypothesis Testing for Outlier Detection
Figure 4:Audio watermark attack detection. The defender uses
ground truth (GT) audio (watermarked and clean) to estimate
the reference distribution (top) and applies outlier detection
with respect to this distribution to determine whether an audio
sample has been attacked (bottom).
4.1. Audio Watermark Attack Detection
As demonstrated in Section 3.2, the distribution of message
probabilities in perturbed audio exhibits significant deviations
from that of benign audio, thereby providing the foundation for
our proposed detection mechanism to effectively distinguish be-
tween the two. Figure 4 illustrates the audio watermark attack
detection method, which introduces a two-step approach.
Distribution-Based Detection Design.The key intuition is that
message probabilities from clean and watermarked audio follow
different statistical patterns. Building on this, we propose that
the defenders can collect ground-truth audio, extract message
probabilities with the watermark decoder, and apply maximum
likelihood estimation to model their distributions. As shown
in Figure 2, this process yields three normal distributions: one
derived from message probabilities of clean audio and two from
those of watermarked audio.
Specifically, givennaudio samples, each producing a prob-
ability vector of size1×Nmessage probabilities, the complete
set of message probabilities is denoted as:
p=


p11 p12 ···p 1N
p21 p22 ···p 2N
...
... ... ...
pn1 pn2 ···p nN

∈R n×N.
The meanµand standard deviationσof the normal distribution
estimated via maximum likelihood are:
µ= 1
nN
nX
i=1
NX
j=1
pij, σ 2 = 1
nN
nX
i=1
NX
j=1
(pij−µ) 2. (5)
Finally, the defender obtains the corresponding meansµand
standard deviationsσ, which are used to detect outliers in sus-
picious audio and determine whether it has been attacked.
Hypothesis Testing for Outlier Detection.We formalize de-
tection as an outlier detection problem under a statistical hy-
pothesis testing framework. Given a potentially perturbed audio
sample, the defender uses the watermark decoder to extract its
message probability set{p i}, where each element is assumed
to follow a normal distribution with meanµand standard devi-
ationσ. We then test the null hypothesisH 0 :p i∼N(µ,σ 2)
against the alternativeH 1 :p i̸∼N(µ,σ 2). IfH 0 is rejected,
the audio sample is classified as attacked.
To test the hypothesis, we first compute the z-score for each
extracted message probability:
zi = pi−µ
σ .(6)
Output Estimate
Estimated 
Distribution
Deploy
Clean Audio Watermark
Model Watermarked Audio
Deploy Generate
Message 
Probabilities
Watermark 
Decoder
a. Distribution Estimation for Message Probabilities in Watermark Replacement and Creation
b. Distribution Estimation for Message Probabilities in Watermark Removal
Watermark 
Decoder
Output Estimate
Deploy
Estimated 
Distribution
Message 
ProbabilitiesClean Audio
Adaptive 
Attack
Obtain
Obtain
Figure 5:The distribution estimation by the attacker. (a) Water-
mark replacement and creation: The attacker uses a small set
of clean audio samples to generate watermarked audio samples,
which are then used to estimate the distribution. (b) Watermark
removal: The attacker directly uses the clean audio samples to
estimate the distribution.
Under the null hypothesis,z i follows the standard normal
distribution, and the corresponding two-tailed p-value is given
byP i = 2 (1−Φ(|z i|)), whereΦdenotes the cumulative dis-
tribution function of the standard normal distribution. The de-
cision rule is to rejectH 0 ifP i < α, withαas the predefined
significance level. An audio sample is deemed being “attacked”
if any extracted message probabilitypi rejectsH 0.
4.2. Adaptive Attack Design
We propose an adaptive attack designed to bypass message-
probability-distribution–based detection. First, the attacker pre-
pares for the attack by estimating the defender’s distribution.
Second, the attacker performs the watermark attack, which con-
tains two stages: (1) modify the original audio to bypass the de-
fense and achieve a successful attack, and (2) improve the qual-
ity of the perturbed audio, while maintaining that the decoded
message probabilities remain within an acceptable range.
4.2.1. Attack Preparation: Estimate Defender’s Distribution
The adversary’s goal is to estimate the meanµ est and the
standard deviationσ est of the decoded message probabilities.
These parameters are categorized into two groups: watermark
replacement and creation, and watermark removal. The process
is illustrated in Figure 5.
Parameter Estimation for Watermark Replacement and
Creation.The attackers first select several clean audio samples
sc from a small dataset, which are used to query the watermark
modelEnc(·)and generate new watermarked audio samples
sw. The watermark decoderDec(·)is deployed to extract mes-
sage probabilities, which are subsequently used to estimate the
parameters of the normal distribution. Since the distribution
of watermarked message probabilities is bimodal (as shown in
Figure 2(b) and 2(d)), the attacker can obtain two distributions.
The estimated mean and standard deviation are as follows:
µ0
est,σ 0
est =T 0(Dec(Enc(sc))),
µ1
est,σ 1
est =T 1(Dec(Enc(sc))),
(7)
whereµ 0
est andσ 0
est represent the estimated mean and stan-
dard deviation of decoded message probabilities predicted as 0,
andµ 1
est andσ 1
est correspond to those predicted as 1.T(·)de-
notes the method used to estimate the parameters of the normal
distribution, which depends on the attacker’s prior k