Towards Robust Speech Deepfake Detection via Human-Inspired Reasoning
Artem Dvirniak1, Evgeny Kushnir2,3,4, Dmitrii Tarasov3,4, Artem Iudin6, Oleg Kiriukhin7, Mikhail
Pautov2,8, Dmitrii Korzh2,4,6,∗∗, Oleg Y. Rogov2,4,6
1MIRAI, 2AXXX, 3HSE, 4Applied AI Institute, 5Fusion Brain Lab, AXXX,
6MTUCI, 7City University of Hong Kong, 8Trusted AI Research Center, RAS
d.s.korzh@mtuci.ru
Abstract
The modern generative audio models can be used by an ad-
versary in an unlawful manner, specifically, to impersonate
other people to gain access to private information. To mitigate
this issue, speech deepfake detection (SDD) methods started to
evolve. Unfortunately, current SDD methods generally suffer
from the lack of generalization to new audio domains and gen-
erators. More than that, they lack interpretability, especially
human-like reasoning that would naturally explain the attribu-
tion of a given audio to the bona fide or spoof class and provide
human-perceptible cues. In this paper, we propose HIR-SDD,
a novel SDD framework that combines the strengths of Large
Audio Language Models (LALMs) with the chain-of-thought
reasoning derived from the novel proposed human-annotated
dataset. Experimental evaluation demonstrates both the effec-
tiveness of the proposed method and its ability to provide rea-
sonable justifications for predictions.
Index Terms: deepfake detection, voice anti-spoofing, audio
LLM, reasoning, benchmark
1. Introduction
Contests, such as ASVspoof [1, 2], ADD [3, 4], and Singfake [5,
6] drive the progress in audio and speech deepfake detection
(SDD) research, providing high-quality deepfake data and fair
evaluation protocols. SDD and spoofing-aware speaker verifi-
cation (SASV) research primarily focuses on the architecture
design, including task-specific front-ends [7], graph-attention
networks [8], self-supervised (SSL) audio encoders [9, 10], and
architecture modifications [11, 12] to improve the empirical per-
formance of the models. Additionally, augmentation strategies
[13], optimizer choices [14], and representation learning-based
approaches [15, 16, 17] are also investigated in SDD research.
Unfortunately, SDD remains challenging due to distribution
shifts across spoofing methods, speech domains, and transfor-
mations, as evidenced by results from the aforementioned con-
tests. A common strategy to improve empirical performance
is to increase training diversity and model capacity. How-
ever, SDD systems still fail to generalize to unseen domains,
highlighting the need for more robust and explainable detec-
tion approaches. Such tools are particularly important for risk-
sensitive applications, such as biometrics and banking, yet this
direction remains underexplored in SDD research.
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) [18, 19]
and Large Audio Language Models (LALMs), such
as SALMONN [20], Qwen2-Audio [21], and Audio-
Flamingo 3 [22], have demonstrated strong reasoning
capabilities. Chain-of-thought (CoT) [23] and related reason-
**indicates the corresponding author.
ing methods [19] often improve performance by extracting
intermediate rationales. Although CoT mainly acts as an
empirical mechanism and does not necessarily reflect human
reasoning, careful training and grounding can produce explana-
tions that are consistent with the input and useful for analysis.
Similar ideas have been explored for audio question answering
and captioning (including music understanding) [24, 25],
disease detection from speech [26], emotion recognition [27],
and interpretable audio quality assessment and hard-label
SDD [28].
However, reasoning-based approaches remain relatively un-
common in SDD. One practical limitation is the lack of open-
source datasets with high-quality human explanations for train-
ing and evaluation. Moreover, existing LALMs, even state-of-
the-art, drastically underperform in zero- and few-shot SDD,
thereby limiting the reliability of their reasoning traces [29].
To address these gaps, we introduce a human-annotated dataset
for CoT training and evaluation of SDD models and propose
HIR-SDD, a human-inspired reasoning framework that com-
bines hard-label and CoT-supervised fine-tuning, grounding,
and reinforcement learning (RL) methods.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We present 1 a new dataset of human-annotated reasoning
traces for 41k bona fide and spoof speech samples partially
curated from existing open-source datasets.
• We propose a hard-label and CoT pipelines that achieve both
strong countermeasure and reasoning explainability perfor-
mance. The source code is available online2.
• We provide further improvement and evaluation strategies of
reasoning-capable SDD models.
2. Related work
ALLM4ADD [29] is among the first studies to explore large-
scale LALMs for SDD. The authors report weak zero-shot per-
formance for Qwen and Qwen2-Audio [21], and then fine-
tune the models with a simple prompt requesting a binary
“Real”/“Fake” response for the input speech. Across several
benchmarks, the resulting systems match or outperform smaller
state-of-the-art detectors. The study also analyzes training data
scaling, sensitivity to LoRA [30] rank, and prompt design.
However, the evaluation in [29] does not include the more re-
cent ASVspoof 5 benchmark [2]. Moreover, the analysis fo-
cuses mainly on hard-label classification, leaving the reasoning
and interpretability capabilities of LALMs largely unexplored.
In [31], the authors study the robustness of SDD models
that produce reasoning traces alongside binary decisions. Ex-
1https://hf.co/datasets/marsianin500/HIR-SDD
2https://github.com/dkorzh10/HIR-SDD
2418
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1289
planations are evaluated along three aspects: perception qual-
ity (e.g., captioning or recognition fidelity), coherence be-
tween reasoning and prediction, and robustness under domain
shift caused by audio transformations and adversarial pertur-
bations [32]. The results indicate that reasoning traces do not
consistently improve detection accuracy: well-grounded mod-
els may benefit, while other LALMs degrade due to halluci-
nated justifications. The study mainly audits explanation sensi-
tivity under perturbations rather than improving standard SDD
evaluation protocols. Experiments are also limited to older gen-
erative conditions from ASVspoof 19. Step-Audio-R1 [25] ad-
dresses audio reasoning issues by grounding explanations to
real acoustic evidence rather than textual hallucinations. The
approach combines CoT-style supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and
RLVR [33], followed by Modality-Grounded Reasoning Distil-
lation (MGRD). MGRD iteratively self-distills partially correct
CoT traces while excluding batches where traces are fully cor-
rect or almost entirely incorrect. This process improves per-
formance across speech, environmental sound, and music tasks.
However, the method has not been applied to SDD.
Explainable AI methods for audio are surveyed in [34].
In [35], an interpretability method for SDD by modifying an
SSL-based detector and introducing a class-activation-style rep-
resentation to highlight influential time regions is proposed.
However, evaluation is limited to ASVspoof 2019, and does not
provide textual explanations. In [36], a benchmark for time-
localized, model-agnostic post-hoc explanations in audio clas-
sification is introduced, using temporally annotated events as
proxy ground truth. HoliAntiSpoof [37] applies LALMs to
jointly reason about spoofing mechanisms, temporal localiza-
tion, and semantic artifacts. While it improves hard-label per-
formance and interpretability compared to binary classifiers, it
does not explicitly evaluate the quality of SDD reasoning, re-
quires specialized re-training and does not provide results on
ASVspoof5.
It is worth mentioning that humans also struggle with
SDD [38]. The study [39] evaluates responses from1200
annotators and reports73%binary accuracy on detecting
deepfakes from ASVspoof 21 [40], WaveFake [41], and
FakeA VCeleb [42]. Annotators also provide free-form expla-
nations, later grouped into eight cue categories (e.g., prosody,
liveness, quality). The authors compare these cues with auto-
mated detectors to analyze when humans outperform machines
and which cues are reliable. Although the dataset is diverse,
the public release includes only keywords rather than full ex-
planations and does not clearly separate binary decisions from
reasoning comments.
3. Dataset collection
3.1. Audio sources
Audio was primarily collected from several open-source SDD
datasets in English and Russian, including ASVspoof 5 [2],
PyAra [43], LibriSecV oc [44], MLAAD [45], DFADD [46],
and M-AILABS [47]. We also included bona fide speech from
Golos [48], SOV A [49], and Russian LibriSpeech (RuLS) [50].
In addition, we incorporated a subset of annotated samples
from the SpeechEval dataset introduced in SpeechLLM-as-
Judges [28]. We further generated audio using the open-source
XTTS-V2 [51] model and several ESpeech [52] models. To di-
versify and strengthen the test set, we also synthesized several
thousand samples using proprietary ElevenLabs [53] models,
approximating real-world conditions.
0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000
Count
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14 Reason ID
Figure 1:Distribution of obtained reasons from Listing 1.
3.2. Ethics
The study and annotation procedure received Institutional Re-
view Board approval. Annotators were informed about the
project goals and agreed to participate under these conditions.
No personally identifiable information (e.g., age, race, gender)
was collected. Instead, anonymized identifiers were used. The
annotation platform preserved participant anonymity, and anno-
tators were compensated per sample, corresponding to approx-
imately $8–10 per hour. Annotators were required to be native
speakers of either English or Russian and preferably proficient
in the other language. No individual was obligated to annotate.
3.3. Instructions
Unlike [39], where the questionnaire was designed to avoid
training annotators, we provided detailed instructions, training
examples, and feedback on prediction accuracy during labeling,
including additional training or removal of underperforming an-
notators. However, annotators were not guided on how to write
explanations and were not shown the correct labels. Audio sam-
ples were presented in random order. For each audio sample,
annotators answered the question:Assess whether the
audio sample contains original (genuine)
human speech or synthesized (artificial)
speech. If “genuine” was selected, annotators provided a
brief explanation. If “artificial” was selected, they provided
a free-form explanation and selected relevant reasons from a
predefined list of14options, as shown in Listing 1.
Listing 1:Annotation reasons list.
1yt (1) Lack of fluency or coherence
2(2) Unnatural pauses
3(3) Uniform pauses between words throughout
the audio
4(4) Unusual intonation patterns
5(5) Insufficient variation in speaking style
6(6) Incorrect stress in common words
7(7) Mispronunciation of common words
8(8) Unusual or inconsistent accent
9(9) Atypical voice characteristics
10(10) Excessively fast speech
11(11) Incorrect reading of abbreviations
12(12) Verbalization of typographical errors
13(13) Word-by-word repetition in cases of
tautology
14(14) Other (please specify)
15Optional comment:
16______________________________
Annotators were additionally provided with the following
recommendations:
2419
• If you selected “synthesized” and indicated specific factors
from the list, please describe in detail where and how these
cues manifested in the audio.
• If you are uncertain, explain which aspects appeared suspi-
cious and which seemed natural.
• If you selected “genuine”, describe the characteristics that led
you to perceive the speech as natural (e.g., realistic pauses,
natural intonation, breathing patterns, expressive variability).
• Responses should be detailed and well justified. Short state-
ments such as “it sounds normal” are not acceptable.
Table 1:Evaluation results onTest-1-HL.
Model Train
Set Accuracy Balanced
Accuracy F1
Wav2Vec2-
AASIST
Train-1-HL 92.3 81.3 76.7
Train-2-HL 92.9 84.0 76.7
Train-1-HL
Train-2-HL 92.3 83.9 76.6
SALMONN-7b
Train-1-HL 93.4 89.3 84.5
Train-2-HL 94.5 88.6 85.7
Train-1-HL
Train-2-HL 93.1 83.8 80.4
Train-2-R 92.9 86.7 81.4
Train-1-HL
Train-2-R 92.7 86.5 81.2
Train-2-R
Val-1-GRPO 93.6 89.6 85.0
3.4. Annotations filtering and postprocessing
For data filtering, the following strategy was applied. First,
we excluded annotators with classification accuracy below
75%. Second, samples with incorrect class predictions were
removed. Finally, we manually inspected 30–50 annotations
per annotator. Considering their overall accuracy, we catego-
rized responses as ”high” quality (≥85% accuracy or more)
or ”medium” quality (≥75% accuracy or more). After filter-
ing, the dataset contained124,410annotations of41,414audio
samples (32,045spoof and9,369bona fide) provided by37an-
notators. The distribution of selected reasons is shown in Fig. 1.
In total,120,258non-empty comments were collected with an
average length of12words. Human annotations and question-
naire selections were translated to English and post-processed
using Qwen-32B to produce reasoning-like traces. For a fidelity
check, a random set of100audios was evaluated to verify that
the rewritten traces align with genuine human annotations.
3.5. Splits
The hard-label dataset (without reasoning) was collected from
the sources described in subsection 3.1, and is denoted as
Train-1-HL.Val-1-HLis a whole ASVspoof 5 develop-
ment subset. ForTest-1-HL, we randomly selected20,000
samples from the ASVspoof 5 evaluation subset, collecting
15,943spoof and4,057bona fide audio. The reasoning
dataset was split into train, validation, and test subsets of 114k,
8k, and 1k samples, respectively. These splits can be used
for binary classification or CoT training and evaluation, e.g.,
Train-2-HLandTrain-2-R. We highlight that ASVspoof
5 splits do not share the same domain and have different non-
overlapping generators, and comprise more modern generators
than in WaveFake, FakeA VCeleb, or ASVspoof2021 datasets.
4. Methodology
4.1. Binary classification and CoT SFT training
Despite strong overall performance, LLMs and LALMs often
show weak zero-shot and few-shot results on new tasks, in-
cluding SDD [29]. Following this observation, we begin with
SFT using LoRA applied to all linear projections of the LLM
backbone. We use SALMONN [20], which combines Whis-
per [54] and BEATS [55] audio encoders with a Q-Former [56]
adapter connected to the Vicuna-7B/13B [57] LLM. The model
receives concatenated audio features and textual instructions
and is trained with cross-entropy loss on completion tokens only
(prompt tokens are masked). For comparison, we also evaluate
a strong conventional Wav2Vec2-AASIST [9] SDD model. For
hard-label SFT, the model is trained on theTrain-1-HL,
Train-2-HL, or their combination to output a binary an-
swer (“Final Answer: Real” or “Final Answer:
Fake”), resembling ALLM4ADD’s approach. ForCoT SFT,
the model is trained on theTrain-2-Rto produce structured
output in the following format:
<think>...</think>
<reasons>[...]</reasons>
<answer>Real/Fake</answer>,
where<think>holds the free-form reasoning trace,
<reasons>lists detected cues from the annotation taxonomy
(Listing 1), and<answer>gives the final binary prediction.
Two initialization strategies are explored: (i) fine-tuning
from the base (vanilla) LALM, and (ii) fine-tuning from a hard-
label SFT checkpoint. In both cases, the model is trained to gen-
erate the full structured output, including the reasoning trace,
the list of detected artifact categories, and the binary prediction.
Incorrectly annotated samples were excluded from CoT due to
the unreliability.
SALMONN-7B was fine-tuned using LoRA with rank128,
α= 256, and dropout0.2. The learning rate started at10 −6
with a5000-step warm-up, reached10−4, and decayed to10−5.
Audio was cropped or padded to 10s. GRPO weights were set
to 0.2/0.7/0.1 for format/class/judge predictions, respectively.
4.2. GRPO and grounding
The LALM can generate fluent and structurally valid CoT traces
that nevertheless do not correspond to the actual audio content
and can be based on hallucinations or training CoT memoriza-
tion. To address this issue, we use an audio grounding stage to
explicitly encourage the model to anchor its<think>traces
and its<reasons>tags to perceptible acoustic evidence, such
as Gaussian noise, time masking, and gain adjustments embed-
ded deterministically in the audio signal. To further improve
the quality and diversity of CoT, a GRPO [58] was applied. Re-
ward functions encouraged the model’s correctness, following
the format (<think>,<reasons>,<answer>tags) and ad-
justing to human preferences. For the latter, Qwen2.5-32B was
requested to evaluate each generation on its coverage, relevance,
logic (coherence with binary prediction) and helpfulness from0
to10. For each sample, we generated6distinct reasoning traces
to calculate rewards.
4.3. Metrics
For the primary metrics of SDD classification, accuracy, bal-
anced accuracy, and F1 (positive class is bona fide) were con-
sidered. Reasoning quality was evaluated using the GPT-5.1
[59] model over the same criteria set that were used in GRPO:
2420
Table 2:Reasoning samples for SALMONN-7B tuned onTrain-2-Rand evaluated onTest-2-R.
Human Comment Tags Label Model Reasoning Pred. Tags Pred. Label
I believe the audio is genuine. I heard a non-
robotic voice. The speech pace varies, speeding
up and slowing down. There is a natural rhythm
following the meaning, clear pronunciation, slight
tone changes, and audible breaths without arti-
facts.
– Real I believe the audio is genuine. The voice is non-
robotic and the pace varies naturally. The rhythm
sounds lively and human, with logical stress and
clear pronunciation.
– Real
The synthesized speech has high quality and clear
intelligibility without artifacts. The voice is soft
and neutral, but the speech rate is slightly fast and
emotional engagement is limited.
(5),(10) Fake The speech is too fast and uninterrupted. (1),(2),(10) Fake
The voice is monotone and the narrator reads the
sentence without pausing.
(1),(9) Fake The speech is unnaturally fast; it is difficult for
a person to speak this quickly without pauses or
mistakes. Odd pronunciation of “Europe”.
(1),(2),(9) Fake
Monotone speech. It’s not entirely clear from the
context what intonation was originally intended.
(4),(9) Fake The voice sounds robotic, and the speech is unnat-
ural and staccato.
(4),(9) Fake
A genuine recording for a voice assistant. En-
vironmental noise is audible (TV in the back-
ground).
– Real The speech sounds authentic: natural intona-
tion, individual pronunciation of sounds, consis-
tent speaking pace, and background noise consis-
tent with a television.
– Real
recall, relevance, logic, helpfulness, with scores from 0 to 10.
Sets of reasons (tags) were evaluated using the Jaccard similar-
ity index. For predicted tags ˆYand ground-truth tagsY, it is
defined asJ(Y, ˆY) = |Y∩ ˆY|
|Y∪ ˆY|.
5. Results and discussion
SALMONN-7B outperformed conventional Wav2Vec2-
AASIST in terms of binary classification metrics, as shown in
Table 1. Moreover, the obtained models demonstrate similar or
better results compared to the open-source models, presented
on Speech DF-Arena leaderboard [60] .
Nonetheless, LALMs can demonstrate weak training sta-
bility and a drastic overfitting tendency; to mitigate this is-
sue, the number of training iterations and learning rate might
be decreased, while dropout and augmentation range are in-
creased. Training on the combined dataset ofTrain-1-HL
andTrain-2-HLdoes not improve the results, compared to
the separately trained checkpoints. Regarding hard-label eval-
uation of reasoning checkpoints, while reasoning-only SFT un-
derperformed to the hard-label checkpoints, GRPO tuning im-
proves the results. The hypothesis that hard-label SFT can
help the reasoning SFT has not been confirmed. We high-
light the decent reasoning performance on a set of samples
fromTest-2-R, which is reflected in Table 2. One can no-
tice that SALMONN provides reasonable audio-grounded cues,
such as referring to particular words’ pronunciation and to back-
ground noises. Among the other findings, it is noticeable that
grounding does not significantly improve the classification met-
rics, but diversifies the chain-of-thought traces, while GRPO
further improves the reasoning. After applying these tech-
niques to the model, the diversity and informativeness of the an-
swers it generates, as well as its classification metrics, increase
(see Table 1). Binary classification Test-1-HL EER is13.2%
(for SALMONN-7B model) and15.7%(for W2V2-AASIST
model). CoT final decisions are strongly conditioned on the
preceding trace, making EER redundant. Despite these results,
the resulting reasoning models still struggle with modern high-
fidelity synthesis systems that were not present in the training
data. LALM’s reasoning often describes deepfake audio as gen-
uine speech. Nonetheless, one can train a model to output “no
audible artifacts” on genuine speech, treating bona fide as an
abstention class.
Regarding CoT quality evaluation, GRPO does not yield a
significant improvement in the Jaccard index. Namely, for the
same audio sample, inter-annotator agreement on selecting each
individual reason ranged from0.05to0.56in Fleiss’ kappa.
However, the average pairwise Jaccard similarity between an-
notators’ selected reason sets was0.78on the test set, which
might serve as a reference point for the comparison with mod-
els’ performance. Given the noise in reasoning-tag markup, the
scores are effectively unchanged:0.6468for the GRPO check-
point vs.0.6264for the SFT checkpoint.
In an LLM-as-a-judge evaluation (five runs on1,000rea-
soning samples), GRPO shows a small but non-significant im-
provement in reasoning-trace quality: mean score5.74±1.49
vs.5.12±1.47for SFT. However, the observations suggest that
without grounding and a GRPO, reasoning becomes poorer, as
it lacks more audio cues. We note that the judge’s rubric is in-
tentionally strict, which keeps absolute scores relatively low.
6. Conclusion
This work addressed the problem of limited generalization
and poor interpretability in modern speech deepfake detection
systems. We introduced a novel human-annotated reasoning
dataset for the SDD and proposed a HIR-SDD, a framework that
enables models not only to perform binary spoof detection but
also to provide human-interpretable explanations grounded in
perceptual cues. Experimental results demonstrate that the pro-
posed framework achieves competitive detection performance
while producing meaningful reasoning traces aligned with hu-
man annotations. These findings suggest that the incorporation
of proposed human-inspired reasoning traces can improve both
transparency and reliability of SDD systems. Future work in-
cludes improving robustness to unseen generative models and
domain shifts, as well as refining the stability, quality, and eval-
uation of reasoning traces produced by LALMs.
2421
7. Generative AI use disclosure
AI models were used only for grammar correction and for text
refining.
8. Acknowledgment
The work was supported by the grant for research centers in
the field of AI provided by the Ministry of Economic Develop-
ment of the Russian Federation in accordance with the agree-
ment 000000C313925P4F0002 and the agreement№139-10-
2025-033.
9. References
[1] M. Todisco, X. Wang, V . Vestman, M. Sahidullah, H. Delgado,
A. Nautsch, J. Yamagishi, N. Evans, T. Kinnunen, and K. A. Lee,
“Asvspoof 2019: Future horizons in spoofed and fake audio de-
tection,”arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05441, 2019.
[2] X. Wang, H. Delgado, H. Tak, J.-w. Jung, H.-j. Shim, M. Todis