Benchmarking Speech Systems for Frontline Health Conversations:
The DISPLACE-M Challenge
Dhanya E1,∗∗, Ankita Meena1, Manas Nanivadekar1, Noumida A1, Victor Azad1, Ashwini Nagaraj
Shenoy2, Pratik Roy Chowdhuri2, Shobhit Banga3, Vanshika Chhabra3, Chitralekha Bhati4, Shareef
babu Kalluri5,∗∗, Srikanth Raj Chetupalli6, Deepu Vijayasenan2, Sriram Ganapathy1
1 LEAP Lab, Electrical Engineering, IISc, Bangalore, 2 Department of EC, NITK, Surathkal,
3 Josh Talks, 4 TANUH, IISc, Bangalore, 5 MIT Bengaluru, MAHE, Manipal, 6 IIT Bombay, India
dhanyae@iisc.ac.in, shareefbabu1@gmail.com
Abstract
The DIarization and Speech Processing for LAnguage
understanding in Conversational Environments - Medical
(DISPLACE-M) challenge introduces a conversational AI
benchmark for understanding goal-oriented, real-world medi-
cal dialogues. The challenge addresses multi-speaker interac-
tions between frontline health workers and care seekers, char-
acterized by spontaneous, noisy and overlapping speech. As
part of the challenge, medical conversational dataset compris-
ing40hours of development and15hours of blind evaluation
recordings was released. We provided baseline systems across 4
tasks - speaker diarization, automatic speech recognition, topic
identification and dialogue summarization - to enable consistent
benchmarking. System performance is evaluated using diariza-
tion error rate (DER), time-constrained minimum-permutation
word error rate (tcpWER) and ROUGE-L. This paper describes
the Phase-I evaluation - data, tasks and baseline systems - along
with the summary of the evaluation results.
Index Terms: speaker diarization, speech recognition, conver-
sational systems
1. Introduction
Speech processing tools for the understanding of conversa-
tions from the healthcare domain can have transformative ef-
fects on public health systems, especially in community health-
care settings. Existing speech datasets in this domain are
mostly recorded in controlled environments such as hospitals,
involve structured clinician-patient conversations, and are pre-
dominantly in English. AI-driven tools developed using such
datasets often fail to perform when deployed in real-world se-
tups involving community healthcare workers. Further, there
is a lack of research in multi-lingual settings. To catalyze re-
search efforts in this space, we collected and released an anno-
tated corpus of conversations between community health work-
ers and healthcare seekers in informal settings in Hindi. Using
the data, we hosted an open leaderboard-style challenge - “The
DIarization andSpeechProcessing forLAnguage understand-
ing inConversationalEnvironments - Medical (DISPLACE-M)
challenge”. This paper makes three main contributions:
1. A new benchmark built from Hindi health conversations cap-
turing spontaneous, code-mixed, multi-speaker interactions
recorded in unconstrained natural settings.
2. A unified evaluation framework covering four interconnected
tasks - (i) speaker diarization, (ii) automatic speech recogni-
tion (ASR), (iii) topic identification, and (iv) dialogue sum-
**indicates the corresponding author.
marization, to perform end-to-end assessment of conversa-
tional speech-understanding systems.
3. Baseline systems and evaluation frameworks to support re-
producible research and a leaderboard platform to propel sub-
sequent phases of the challenge.
2. Related Work and Paper Organization
ASR research has seen significant progress in conversational
settings, particularly for meetings, call centers, and other multi-
party environments. Datasets such as the ICSI Meeting Cor-
pus [1] and the AMI Meeting Corpus [2] have been widely
used to study spontaneous multi-speaker conversational speech.
However, the conversations in these datasets differ significantly
from those in frontline healthcare settings, where conversa-
tions are goal-driven, medically grounded, and often involve
nuanced contextual information. Topic classification has been
widely studied for meetings, call centers, and online discus-
sions, while dialogue summarization datasets have largely been
derived from customer support conversations, news interviews,
scripted meeting scenarios or informal meetings [3–6].
Research in spoken conversation processing in healthcare
has primarily focused on data collected in clinical or hospital
environments. Resources such as MIMIC [7] and i2b2 [8] have
enabled extensive work on clinical documentation and infor-
mation extraction, but these datasets are predominantly English
and reflect formal clinical workflows rather than informal front-
line interactions [9]. Similarly, prior ASR efforts have focused
on physician dictation or structured clinical interviews recorded
under relatively clean acoustic conditions with limited speaker
variability [10]. These works largely focus on ASR evaluations
and do not probe goal-oriented conversational metrics.
In the Indian context, there has been a growing interest in
developing diarization and ASR systems for multilingual set-
tings [11]. However, existing datasets are restricted to iso-
lated utterances or short conversational clips [12–15], which
limits their suitability for studying long-form, dialogue cen-
tric ASR systems. Further, there are no public datasets cover-
ing conversations in the healthcare domain. Despite substantial
progress in medical NLP and conversational ASR, there is still
no benchmark that captures the complexity of real-world front-
line healthcare interactions.
To fill this gap, we collected the DISPLACE-M dataset
and launched the evaluation campaign. The Phase-I of the
DISPLACE-M evaluations was organized between January 1,
2026 and February 27, 2026. The details of the dataset (Sec-
tion 3), tracks and metrics (Section 4), baseline systems (Sec-
tion 5) and challenge results (Section 6) are described below.
5521
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3255
Track 1
Diarization
Track 2
ASR
Track 3
Topic Identification
Track 4
Medical Dialogue
SummarizationDERReference
RTTM
Predicted
RTTM
tcpWERReference
speaker-wise
transcripts
Predicted speaker-
wise transcripts
Rouge-LReference
summaries
Rouge-1Reference 
Topics
Predicted
topics
Predicted
summaries
Raw audio 
(health conversation)
Figure 1:DISPLACE-M Baseline system development pipeline which involves a cascaded approach of speaker diarization (SD), ASR
and topic identification / summarization modules.
3. DISPLACE-M Challenge
3.1. Data Collection
We recorded around55hours of annotated healthcare con-
versational speech from rural and semi-urban areas, collected
through field deployments in the Indian states of Haryana and
Bihar. Data collection was conducted by80frontline com-
munity health workers across20administrative blocks span-
ning10districts. The primary participants were NPHWs (non-
physician health workers) - ASHA 1 and Anganwadi Sevikas
2 and healthcare seekers (HS). Recordings captured natural
NPHW-HS conversations occurring during routine community
healthcare interactions. These interactions took place in real
care environments such as Primary Health Centres (PHCs), An-
ganwadi centers, primary schools, open village meeting spaces
(chaupals), household visits and community outreach settings.
In our recordings, Hindi served as the primary language with
code-switching to Indian English and with heavy use of regional
dialects, such as Haryanvi, Bhojpuri, and Magahi, reflecting
natural linguistic practices.
The recorded conversations include speakers from differ-
ent age groups. Each recording ranges from5-30minutes,
typically involving goal-oriented conversations between two
participants - NPHW and a healthcare seeker. The conversa-
tions, which include nature field ambiance, primarily focused
on topics such as General Health and Constitutional Symptoms
(e.g., weakness, fatigue, weight loss, low hemoglobin/blood
loss), Women’s Health and Gynecological Issues (e.g., men-
strual problems, pregnancy, family planning), Acute Illnesses
and Infections (e.g., fever, cough, cold, typhoid, dengue), and
Preventive Care and Diagnostics (e.g., routine check-ups, blood
tests, ultrasounds). All audio recordings were captured using
the far-field microphone of a mobile device. The recording for-
mat was W A V using16-bit PCM at16kHz sampling rate.
3.2. Annotation
All recordings were processed through a structured, multi-stage
manual annotation pipeline prior to dataset finalization. We per-
formed a multi-stage check to ensure quality of the audio files,
1ASHA (Accredited Social Health Activists) workers, who are
government-appointed female community health workers serving as the
first point of contact for healthcare seekers (HS)
2Anganwadi sevikas are frontline workers under India’s Integrated
Child Development Services (ICDS) program
accuracy of the time-markers and the correctness of the ASR
transcripts. Further, the clinical summary is given by an expert
clinician (Doctor) who had access to the audio and ground-truth
rich transcriptions. The workflow was organized into distinct
segmentation, transcription, and quality assurance phases to en-
sure traceability and reproducibility. More details of the dataset,
pre-processing steps, and the annotation quality-checks are pro-
vided in the supplementary material.
3.3. Development and Evaluation set
The development and evaluation set contains35hours of Hindi
medical conversations involving260unique speakers, compris-
ing both HS and NPHWs. The speakers span a broad age range
from19-80years.
For Tracks 1 (speaker diarization) and 2 (ASR), the dataset
is split into25hours for development and10hours for blind
evaluation. The development data was released in two phases:
Dev Set 1 (15hours) and Dev Set 2 (10hours). For Tracks 3
(topic identification) and Track 4 (dialogue summarization), a
separate curated subset of about15hours is provided, with10
hours for development and5hours for evaluation.
Each track has a separate set of reference annotations. The
output hypotheses generated by the challenge participants were
instructed to follow a specific format (like RTTM, json) for each
task in order to enable the evaluation in the open-leaderboard3.
4. Challenge Tracks and Metrics
We define four interconnected tasks -:
1.Track 1 - Speaker Diarization (SD)aims to determine “who
spoke when,” by automatically segmenting the audio into
speaker-homogeneous regions. The performance metric is
the diarization error rate (DER).
2.Track 2 - Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR)system
transcribes multi-speaker healthcare conversations. Sys-
tems are expected to generate time-marked word-level tran-
scriptions for the spontaneous conversational speech. The
performance metric is character error rate (CER), word-
error rate (WER) and tcpWER (Time-Constrained minimum-
Permutation Word Error Rate) [16]. The tcpWER extends
3https://www.codabench.org/
competitions/13833/?secret_key=
1b714e64-0f0d-4e0f-8a3c-be9b3d10f00c#
5522
standard WER to multi-speaker settings by computing the
minimum WER over all possible permutations of reference
and hypothesized speaker streams after concatenating each
speaker’s utterances [16] with constraints along the temporal
axis for alignment. It therefore jointly reflects transcription
quality and speaker assignment consistency, making it suit-
able for evaluating end-to-end diarization-aware ASR.
3.Track 3 - Topic Identification (TI)aims to identify the un-
derlying topics discussed between the NPHW and the HS.
This is similar to topic modeling in NLP applications. The
performance metrics are Rouge-1 (R-1) and Rouge-L (R-
L) [17]. Specifically, R-1 measures the overlap of individ-
ual clinical keywords (unigrams), while R-L identifies the
longest common subsequence to account for sentence struc-
ture and word order.
4.Track 4 - Dialogue Summarization (DS)focuses on gen-
erating concise and informative summaries of multi-speaker
conversations, preserving the essential medical context. The
performance metric is the Rouge-L score [17].
5. Baseline Systems
For the baseline system development, we follow a cascaded
system approach illustrated in Figure 1. Given raw conver-
sational audio, we first perform speaker diarization to obtain
time-stamped speaker segments. These segments are sub-
sequently used to guide the ASR module, which generates
speaker-attributed transcripts. These transcripts then serve as
inputs to topic identification and dialogue summarization.
5.1. Track-1: Speaker Diarization (SD)
The speaker diarization system is the base variant of the Di-
ariZen4 model [18–20], which closely follows the pyannote [21]
pipeline. The pipeline follows a two-stage process, in which an
end-to-end neural diarization (EEND) model first computes the
local diarization results on segments of8s duration, followed by
an Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering (AHC) stage, where
the segment-wise speaker embeddings are grouped to produce
the final diarization output. DiariZen uses a custom architecture
for the EEND model trained using the powerset loss [22], and
ResNet34-LM trained on the V oxCeleb2 dataset [23] to extract
the speaker embeddings. AHC is carried out with the number
of clusters set to2, the minimum cluster size set to13, and an
AHC threshold of0.6. This system is referred to as Baseline-1.
For the DISPLACE-M baseline, DiariZen was evaluated
under two setups - zero-shot inference (Baseline-1) and super-
vised fine-tuning with the development data (Baseline-2). The
fine-tuning was done with the AHC threshold set to0.7and
minimum cluster size set to30.
5.2. Track-2: Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR)
We released two baseline systems based on i) IndicConformer5
and ii) Whisper-large-v36.
1. IndicConformer: This model was developed by the
AI4Bharat initiative. We usedindic-conformer-600m-
multilingualmodel, a Conformer-based end-to-end ASR
model trained on large-scale multilingual Indian speech cor-
pora covering 22 Indian languages [15] for the first baseline.
4https://github.com/BUTSpeechFIT/DiariZen
5https://github.com/AI4Bharat/IndicConformerASR
6https://huggingface.co/openai/whisper-large-v3
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 T8 T9
Baseline-1Baseline-2Sarvam AIGemini
Challenge Teams / Baselines / Closed Models
0
5
10
15
20DER
7.38 7.56 7.65 7.70
9.21 9.25 9.55 9.64
11.07
8.31
20.79
9.31
8.20
Challenge Teams
Baseline
Closed Model
Figure 2:Comparison of Diarization Error Rate (DER %) for
Track 1 Evaluation Phase-I DS task.
2. Whisper-large-v3: The second baseline uses Whisper-large-
v3 [24], a 1550-M parameter multilingual encoder–decoder
speech foundation model trained on web-scale weakly super-
vised audio.
Similar to Track-1, both the models were evaluated with and
without fine-tuning on the development set.
5.3. Track-3: Topic Identification (TI)
We employ an ASR–LLM cascade pipeline to identify medical
topics in healthcare conversations. This approach first converts
spontaneous speech into text using ASR systems, followed by
an LLM -medgemma-1.5-4b-it[25] - to generate the rel-
evant health topics. The specific prompt and setting used is de-
scribed in the supplementary material.
5.4. Track 4: Dialogue Summarization (DS)
Similar to the topic identification pipeline, we used the ASR
transcript for the dialogue summarization (DS) task. For the
summarization stage, we usedLLAMA-3.2-3Bmodel [26] as
the text-based summarization model in a zero-shot setting. The
prompt used for summarization is described in the supplemen-
tary material.
6. Challenge Results
The DISPLACE-M Challenge received registrations from mul-
tiple teams across academia and industry, demonstrating a broad
interest in the proposed benchmark.12international teams ac-
tively participated in the Phase-I leaderboard evaluations.
We also benchmarked state-of-the-art closed-source models
as reference systems. In particular, we evaluated Gemini 2.5
Pro [27] across all four tracks and Sarvam AI’s Saaras v3 7 for
Track 1 (Speaker Diarization) and Track 2 (ASR).
6.1. Track 1: Speaker Diarization
Figure 2 illustrates the Eval Phase-I results for the SD track. A
total of9teams participated in Phase-I evaluation. The top four
systems achieved improvements over Baseline-2.
Team 1 (T1) used a hybrid end-to-end system trained on
multiple datasets and fine-tuned it on the development sets.
They also employed a Dynamic Logits Fusion strategy to com-
bine 5 complementary systems, and obtained their best results.
Team 2 (T2) and Team 3 (T3) fine-tuned the large variant of Di-
7https://dashboard.sarvam.ai/speech-to-text
5523
Table 1:Results on Track-2 (ASR); ZS = Zero-shot inference,
FT = Fine-tuned on challenge dev-set.
System CER (%) WER (%) tcpWER(%)
Challenge Submissions
T110.59 18.15 18.63
T2 11.92 19.26 20.10
T3 15.19 26.13 27.50
Open-source models
ZS IndicConformer (Baseline-1) 15.03 25.56 26.78
FT IndicConformer (Baseline-2) 11.40 19.01 20.23
FT Whisper-large-v3 14.07 23.60 26.32
Closed-source models
Gemini 2.5 Pro 10.76 19.60 –
Sarvam AI (Saaras v3) 14.20 24.60 26.63
Table 2:Results for Track-3 (TI) and Track-4 (DS).
Track-3 Track-4
Team R-1 R-L Team R-L
T10.46 0.44 T10.20
T2 0.36 0.35 T2 0.19
T3 0.16
Baseline 0.15 0.14 Baseline 0.18
Gemini 2.5 Pro 0.40 0.39 Gemini 2.5 Pro 0.21
ariZen with the WavLM model. T2 used Dev-1 for training and
Dev-2 for validation, and obtained their best results with learn-
ing rates of10 −3 and2×10 −5 for the conformer blocks and
WavLM, respectively. In contrast, T3 used a mix of both the
development sets, employing a80 : 20train-validation split.
They utilize a three-stage progressive fine-tuning strategy with
different hyperparameter values in each stage.
6.2. Track 2: ASR
The ASR track received4submissions, of which two teams out-
performed the baseline system. Table 1 presents the Eval Phase-
I results. Among the baselines described in Section 5.2, fine-
tuning significantly improved performance over the zero-shot
setting. The fine-tuned IndicConformer achieved a tcpWER of
20.23% compared to26.78% in the zero-shot setup, indicating
the importance of in-domain adaptation.
Team 1 (T1) fine-tuned the Qwen3-ASR-1.7B model [28]
using approximately 1,800 hours of open-source Hindi speech
data, along with the challenge development set, to better adapt
to domain-specific conversational speech. An LLM-based post-
processing module using GPT-4.1 was further employed for er-
ror correction, with a particular focus on improving the recogni-
tion of medical terminology. Team 2 (T2) followed an approach
similar to our Baseline-2 system, fine-tuning IndicConformer
model on the challenge development set.
6.3. Track 3: Topic Identification
Table 2 presents the results for both Track3and Track4. Track
3received two submissions in Eval Phase-I and both teams out-
performed the baseline system described in Section 5.4.
Team 1 (T1) achieved the highest ROUGE scores, obtain-
ing a ROUGE-1 of0.46and a ROUGE-L of0.44, by using
the Gemini 3 Pro end-to-end model operating directly on raw
audio in a zero-shot configuration. Team 2 (T2) enhanced the
baseline ASR-LLM pipeline by improving translation, topic ex-
traction and incorporating auxiliary patient information. They
included supplementary cues from raw speech, such as vocal
characteristics, to refine topic prediction; for instance, knowl-
edge of a patient’s sex may help distinguish between stomach
pain and menstrual pain. They replaced the baseline transla-
tion model with Llama 3.1 70B Instruct and increased the de-
coding length to 2048 to better capture conversational context.
For topic extraction, they employed Llama3.1-Aloe-Beta-8B, a
model fine-tuned for medical reasoning with prompts refined
iteratively and guided by a reference list of development-set
topics. Additionally, diarization outputs were used to isolate
patient speech, from which age and biological sex were esti-
mated using a Wav2Vec2-based model. These attributes were
appended to the prompt to enable age- and sex-aware topic iden-
tification. Their approach relies entirely on pre-trained models
without additional fine-tuning, using only the released develop-
ment sets for validation.
6.4. Track 4: Dialogue Summarization
Track4received three submissions in Eval Phase-I, of which
two teams outperformed the baseline system. The top-
performing team (T1) proposed an end-to-end pipeline com-
bining Silero-V AD [29] for segmentation, speech translation
from Hindi to English using AudioX-North Whisper [30], and
GPT-4o-mini-based summarization using a structured clinical
prompt. Team 2 (T2) used the Gemini-3 Pro end-to-end model
in a6-shot configuration, where raw audio was directly pro-
vided as input without an intermediate ASR step and the model
was guided by six example transcript–summary pairs from the
challenge development set.
7. Discussion and Conclusion
The DISPLACE-M challenge aims to study and investigate the
difficulties that state-of-the-art systems face in transcribing and
understanding frontline health conversations. Our results indi-
cate that upstream tasks such as speaker diarization and auto-
matic speech recognition still require improvements to enable
seamless understanding of these conversations. The best ASR
system achieved a WER of18.2% (and tcpWER of18.65%).
Further, downstream tasks such as topic identification and dia-
logue summarization remain significantly more challenging due
to their domain-specific nature and the complexity of interac-
tions. Among the evaluated tasks, dialogue summarization is
found to be the most challenging and we observe that even large
closed-source models struggle to generate reliable and clinically
accurate medical summaries. One key reason is the conver-
sational structure of health worker-seeker interactions, as they
often contain implicit symptoms, fragmented descriptions and
context-dependent dialogue, which require deeper reasoning to
interpret correctly. Generating accurate summaries requires do-
main knowledge and multi-step reasoning to interpret symp-
toms and identify medically relevant information. Since the
timeline was only about6weeks, we have initiated a Phase-II
plan for this evaluation which allows10more weeks of open-
leader-board style evaluation. The Phase-II evaluation will in-
clude more languages (beyond Hindi).
In summary, we designed a benchmark to advance conver-
sational AI for frontline health dialogue understanding. The
evaluation framework consists of four tracks - speaker diariza-
tion, automatic speech recognition, topic identification and di-
alogue summarization, allowing a comprehensive evaluation
pipeline from speech processing to higher-level conversational
understanding. We also described the data collection and an-
notation process, as well as baseline systems for the proposed
tasks. Further, the paper summarizes the key findings from the
Phase-I evaluation.
5524
8. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used only for language editing and
grammar correction. All technical content, analysis, discussion
and conclusions were written and verified by the authors.
9. References
[1] A. Janin, D. Baron, J. Edwards, D. Ellis, D. Gelbart, N. Mor-
gan, B. Peskin, T. Pfau, E. Shriberg, A. Stolcke, and C. Wooters,
“The icsi meeting corpus,” in2003 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2003. Proceed-
ings. (ICASSP ’03)., vol. 1, 2003, pp. I–I.
[2] S. Renals, T. Hain, and H. Bourlard, “Recognition and under-
standing of meetings the ami and amida projects,” in2007 IEEE
Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding
(ASRU), 2007, pp. 238–247.
[3] B. Gliwa, I. Mochol, M. Biesek, and A. Wawer, “SAMSum
corpus: A human-annotated dialogue dataset for abstractive
summarization,” inProceedings of the 2nd Workshop on New
Frontiers in Summarization, L. Wang, J. C. K. Cheung,
G. Carenini, and F. Liu, Eds. Hong Kong, China: Association
for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2019, pp. 70–79. [Online].
Available: https://aclanthology.org/D19-5409/
[4] M. Zhong, D. Yin, T. 