Audio-Based Understanding of Audiobook Narration Appeal
Shahar Elisha ID 1,2, Mariano Beguerisse-D´ıaz ID 1, Emmanouil Benetos ID 2
1Spotify, 2Queen Mary University of London
shahar@spotify.com
Abstract
Narration is central to the audiobook listening experience, shap-
ing how listeners engage with and understand the content. This
work explores how narration qualities shape an audiobook’s ap-
peal, noting that their effects can vary by genre, title, and audi-
ence. We extract vocal and acoustic features (e.g., tone, pace,
loudness) from LibriV ox using pre-trained audio models and
analyse their relationship with consumption data (specifically,
view-rate) and their interplay with genre and title. Despite lim-
ited consumption data, we find that acoustic information alone
has a robust association with appeal, even after accounting for
title effects. We further validate these findings using more
nuanced proprietary engagement metrics. To our knowledge,
this is the first systematic computational study linking narration
qualities, genre, title, and audiobook consumption, highlight-
ing the potential of data-driven insights to improve audiobook
personalisation and narrator casting.
Index Terms: audiobooks, narration style, speech paralinguis-
tics, audio processing
1. Introduction
Narration style and acoustic presentation are important compo-
nents of audiobooks; they have the power to either elevate or
undermine a listener’s experience, understanding, and engage-
ment with the story [1]. While the narration alone may not be
the determining factor in audiobook selection amongst users, it
has a significant impact on whether a user completes listening
to the book in full [2]. A narrator offers an interpretation of the
story by varying their voice across pitch, volume, timbre, and
tempo, portraying characteristics such as gender, age, accent,
emotional states and attitudes [3]. This can range from giving
each character a distinct voice, to maintaining a consistent tone
throughout. Other acoustic qualities such as the recording qual-
ity and the use of music and sound effects, can give variety and
texture to a narration. Different genres may call for different
narration styles; for example, an immersive and expressive style
may be better suited to fiction than to non-fiction or academic
texts.
Audiobooks are widely consumed, with platforms such as
Spotify, Audible, LibriV ox, and Libby offering extensive li-
braries. As catalogues expand, these platforms face unique
challenges: distinguishing between multiple recordings of the
same title, understanding the narrations that appeal to different
users or suit different genres, and informing casting decisions.
User-item interaction data is also sparser than in domains such
as music - for example, audiobooks are rarely replayed, and
users consume far fewer than songs. Improving classification,
search, recommendation and personalisation models requires a
sophisticated understanding of audiobooks, not just on its con-
tent (e.g., text, topic, genre, author), but also its narration style,
and their interplay. Even small improvements in modelling ap-
peal can yield substantial gains in large-scale recommendation
systems, where marginal ranking improvements can translate
into increased user engagement and retention [4, 5].
Here, we investigate the relationship between an audio-
book’s narration and acoustic features, genres, title, and con-
sumption to understand how narration influences appeal. We
analyse vocal and acoustic properties of narrations on a large,
publicly available dataset of audiobooks, exploring nuances re-
lated to genres, differences within groups of the same texts,
and consumption statistics. To our knowledge, this is the first
computational study linking acoustic narration features to large-
scale, real-world consumption data across genres and multiple
recordings of the same title (see Sec. 2 for comparison to prior
work). Specifically, our contributions include:
•Statistical analysis of audiobook consumptionto assess the
influence of interpretable acoustic features on a large real-
world dataset.
•Genre-specific modellingto reveal how and which acoustic
features influence appeal across genres.
•Intra-title comparison frameworkfor different narrations
of the same book (i.e. book-groups) to control for content.
•Classification and ranking modelsto evaluate the predic-
tive power of acoustic features for appeal.
We find a statistically significant relationship between the
acoustic features of a narration and an audiobook’s appeal. This
result is striking for two reasons: the narration style is indepen-
dent of the book content, and the dataset has substantial lim-
itations, which include variable recording quality of volunteer
narrations and coarse, limited consumption data. To assess the
robustness of our findings, we conduct follow-up experiments
replacing the LibriV ox consumption proxy with more granular
engagement metrics from a proprietary Spotify dataset. These
results are an important step towards understanding audiobook
narrations and their appeal, offering insights to improve narra-
tor casting and recommendation systems by matching the right
voice to the right book, and the right book to the right listener.
2. Related Works
2.1. Computational Paralinguistics and Voice Perception
Human voices carry paralinguistic information from which a
listener perceives qualities about the speaker’s identity and in-
tention [6]. Researchers have developed computational mod-
els for paralinguistic tasks such as perceived gender and age
classification, health predictors, emotions, social standings, vo-
cal qualities, speaking styles, and even vocal attractiveness
(e.g., [7–14]). The classic approach is to train machine learn-
ing models on predicted acoustic features from the audio (e.g.,
pitch, loudness, or spectral) [15]. Recent works employ sophis-
5878
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-453
ticated techniques, such as transformer models, for improved
performance at the cost of interpretability [8, 10, 16].
2.2. Narration Styles
While plenty of audiobook research uses Text to Speech (TTS)
and voice conversion (VC) models to deliver expressive speech
fit for storytelling (e.g., [17, 18]), studies indicate that listen-
ers prefer human narrations over synthetic ones [19], although
some are interested in the ability to customise synthetic nar-
rations [20]. User surveys and qualitative frameworks estab-
lish the importance of narrator style to the audiobook experi-
ence [1–3], but stop short of identifying which acoustic fea-
tures drive appeal. We build on computational studies ex-
ploring acoustic and vocal features of narration at different
levels: utterance, dialogue, and narrator. Prosody and voice
quality are salient discriminators between storytelling discourse
modes (e.g., narrative, descriptive, and dialogue) [21], a finding
that holds cross-lingually [22], though both approaches rely on
small datasets. At the dialogue level, female characters are nar-
rated with higher pitch and lower volume relative to males [23].
Other studies cluster narrators by speaking style using glot-
tal source parameters [24] or Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) embeddings [25]. Most relevant to our work, Lange et
al. [26] link acoustic features to user-reported absorption and
liking, finding higher articulation rates predict both, though fea-
ture correlations leave the specific drivers unclear. Critically,
none of these studies examine narration appeal at scale across
genres and alternative narrations of the same title.
3. Experimental Setup
3.1. LibriVox catalogue
LibriV ox [27] is a catalogue of public domain audiobooks, read
and recorded by volunteers, with multiple titles and genres.
The metadata (e.g., title, author, narrator, genres, text-source)
and audio files are available to download freely. The Internet
Archive keeps track of the number of page views, favourites,
and reviews of each recording [28]. For simplicity, we focus on
single-narrator, English audiobooks. Our data contains 8,854
audiobooks read by 1,206 different narrators, across 65 gen-
res (e.g., History, Romance, Comedy). We group audiobooks
intobook-groupsif they share the same link to the original text
source (i.e., different recordings of the same text). The dataset
can be found in the supplementary codebase 1. We segment
recordings (typically a chapter) into 30s intervals; we sample
up to 20 segments per recording (the first, last, and 18 ran-
dom segments in the middle), giving a maximum of 10 min-
utes of audio per recording (shorter recordings are included in
full). This strategy balances representativeness with computa-
tional efficiency. In the absence of publicly available informa-
tion about listener satisfaction, downloads, hours listened, or
completion rates, we use the number of views as a proxy for
appeal; the number of favourites and reviews are too small to be
useful in this analysis. We divide the views by the number of
days since publication on LibriV ox (i.e.view-rate) to account
for time-on-platform bias. Note that view-rate is limited as an
appeal metric (e.g., no distinction between completed listens,
brief listens, or multiple listens by a user), which introduces ad-
ditional noise to our analysis. Although an initial page view is
recorded before any listening occurs, we assume that the view
count reflects appeal through repeated visits, as audiobooks are
seldom finished in a single sitting. This proxy is therefore bi-
1https://github.com/spotify-research/
audiobook-narrations-interspeech
Table 1:Acoustic and vocal feature classes, see SM:Table 1 for
all 129 summary statistics.
Descriptors Features
Frequency F0, jitter, F1–3, F1–3 bandwidth
Energy / am-
plitude
Loudness, shimmer, harmonics-to-noise ratio (HNR),
equivalent sound level, loudness peaks per second
Spectral Alpha ratio, Hammarberg index, spectral slope, F1–3
relative energy, harmonic differences (H1–H2, H1–
H3), MFCCs 1–4, spectral flux
Tempo Word rate, syllable rate, duration
Audio events Music, sound effects, recording quality, non-
verbal vocalisations, speech (e.g. conversation, nar-
ration/monologue, screaming, whispering)
ased against shorter recordings, which may require fewer visits
to complete and thus accumulate lower view-rates independent
of appeal. Nevertheless, it is the only large-scale proxy avail-
able, and we use it to ensure transparency and reproducibility.
We further extend our analysis using more nuanced engagement
metrics from proprietary Spotify data to evaluate the robustness
of our findings under a less coarse proxy (Sec. 4.3).
3.2. Feature extraction and aggregation
We extract acoustic and prosodic features for every 30s sample
using well-known, pre-trained audio models with default pa-
rameters (see Table 1), and we concatenate the features for all
segments and chapters per audiobook along the time axis and
calculate summary statistics:
•eGeMAPSv02[29]: 25 low-level acoustic descriptors offre-
quency,energy,spectral, andtempousing the openSMILE
tool [30]. We replicate openSMILE’s aggregation logic to
output 84 functional features (see codebase1).
•YAMNet[31] scores: 521audio eventsclassification scores,
such as human vocals, musical instruments, animal and en-
vironmental sounds. Using the AudioSet ontology [32], we
group audio classes intosound effects,music,recording qual-
ity,nonverbal vocalisations, andspeech. We keep the 13 in-
dividualspeechsubclasses, and aggregate the remaining 4
grouped audio classes by taking the maximum subclass acti-
vation, giving a total 17 audio events. We calculate the mean
and standard deviation of the scores across time for a final
audio events set of 34 features.
•whisper-tiny[33] transcripts with timestamps. We extract
syllables [34] and compute word/syllable counts and rates.
We compute the mean, std, min and max of the word and syl-
lable rates, and the total duration, word and syllable counts,
giving 11 features.
Finally, we concatenate the features into a 129-dimensional au-
diobook vector (see Table 1 in Supplementary Materials (SM)1).
3.3. Statistical Modelling
We investigate how acoustic and vocal features relate to appeal
(view-rate), including genre-specific and intra-title nuances. We
report model fit statistics and statistically significant coeffi-
cients. We apply the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) method to cor-
rect for false correlations (p<0.05) [35].
Feature pre-processing: To address multicollinearity in our
feature set, we perform Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) prun-
ing [36], by iteratively removing the feature with the highest
VIF score (i.e. highly correlated with other features) until all
features have a factor below 5. We standardise the resulting 70
features prior to model fitting.
Global modelling of consumption: We fit a Generalised Lin-
ear Model (GLM) [36] using the pruned and standardised
5879
acoustic features to model audiobook view-rate. The GLM
allows us to assess the significance of individual features and
identify which acoustic properties are most predictive of audio-
book popularity. To account for the long tail in the view-rate
distribution, we log-transform the view-rate and assume a Gaus-
sian error distribution.
Genre-specific: To investigate genre-specific effects, we train
a GLM per genre (65 genres). Within each genre, we re-
standardise the feature set to control for genre-specific distri-
butions. We set the initial parameters to those learned by the
global GLM, and drop near-constant features (std≤1e−12).
We then compare BH-corrected significant coefficients across
genres to examine whether acoustic correlates of appeal vary
by genre.
Intra-title: To account for title-specific effects on appeal, we fit
a Linear Mixed-Effects (LME) model [36]. We model a random
intercept perbook-group, while the acoustic features serve as
the fixed effects. This allows us to disentangle title-driven vari-
ability from acoustic influences on view-rate. We transform our
view-rate into log scale to align with the GLMs. We compare
the model (retrained using maximum likelihood) to the global
GLM using Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) [37], a relative
measure that helps identify the better-fitting model.
3.4. Predictive Modelling
We also want to understand the predictive power of acoustic fea-
tures on classifying and ranking appeal. Because the view-rate
metric provides limited nuance (see Sec. 3.1), we simplify the
problem space by binning view-rates into quartiles, thus con-
verting the task from regression to classification. We use all 129
features as input and standardise during training. We run boot-
strapping to estimate the 95% confidence intervals (CIs) and a
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to confirm that the model predictions
are better than random. We run 1000 random realisations, and
1000 bootstrapping iterations.
Classification: Given the small and largely interpretable fea-
ture set, we train four shallow classifiers: Logistic Regression
(LR), Support Vector Machine (SVM), XGBoost, and Multi-
Layer Perceptron (MLP). For comparison, we train classifica-
tion models using genres as input (multi-hot encoding), and a
combination of acoustic features and genres. We train and eval-
uate models with 5-fold cross-validation, grouped by narrator
and balanced by view-rate quartile. We evaluate overall accu-
racy and assess performance across view-rate quartiles.
Ranking: To capture appeal between different narrations of the
same title (i.e.book-groups), we train ranking models using
acoustic features to predict the within-title rankings where an
audiobook with a higher view-rate ranks higher within its group.
We filter the data to books in groups of size≥2, resulting in 305
groups and 736 audiobooks. Most groups are of size 2, and the
maximum group size is 13. We train and evaluate models with
5-fold cross-validation, grouped by book-groups. We train three
boosted tree models: XGBRanker [38] with a rank:ndcg objec-
tive (based on LambdaMART [39]), with a rank:pairwise objec-
tive (uses RankNet loss [40]), and LGBMRanker [41] (based
on LambdaRank) [42]. While the default training objectives
use Normalised Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG), we re-
port performance using average Kendall’s rank correlation co-
efficients (Kendall’sτ) between predicted and true book-group
rankings, as it directly measures order correlation and avoids
inflated NDCG scores due to small, fully relevant groups (the
average NDCG on random rankings for this dataset is 0.92). Al-
though differentiable adaptations of Kendall’sτexist [43], we
retain the standard training objectives as a starting point since
they are well-established, and focus on Kendall’sτpurely for
evaluation. We compare performance to two pointwise models
using the LR model implemented for classification: 1) trained
and evaluated on the 736 books used for the ranking models,
and 2) trained and evaluated on the full dataset of 8,854 books,
with different cross-validation splits.
4. Results
4.1. Statistical Modelling Results
Global modelling of consumption: The GLM attains a
pseudo-R2 of 0.09, indicating that narration-related properties
explain a measurable portion of variation in appeal despite the
coarse proxy (see Sec. 3.1) and omission of title, genre, and
promotional factors. In a large and noisy real-world dataset,
explaining nearly 10% of the variability using audio features
alone suggests that narration characteristics have a consistent
and non-trivial association with listener engagement. We find
31 acoustic features show a significant effect on view-rate (see
SM:Fig. 1), though no single feature dominates and effect
sizes are mostly small (|β| ≤0.13), suggesting that appeal
is shaped by a combination of acoustic properties rather than
any single dominant factor. For example, variation in vo-
cal shimmer (perceived as a change in vocal qualities, such
as breathiness [44]) has a positive effect on appeal, whereas
higher spectral flux (correlated to speaker gender [12]) is less
favourable. Modelling narrator characteristics (e.g., narrator
gender) instead of the acoustic correlates could clarify the driv-
ing effects and improve interpretability. We find that the du-
ration sum correlates with higher view-rates; this is likely ex-
plained by longer audiobooks requiring more page visits to
complete rather than a preference for longer recordings. Artic-
ulation rate (syllables per min std, which correlates with syl-
lables per min mean:ρ= 0.66) has a positive influence on
appeal; this aligns with findings from a user study [26], show-
ing that higher articulation rates increase listener absorption and
liking. Further analysis of feature correlations is required to re-
fine interpretation.
Genre-specific: The influence of acoustic features on appeal
varies across genres, both in magnitude and direction. For
example, variation in vocal shimmer (perceived as breathi-
ness [44]), which shows a positive effect globally (β= 0.09), is
considerably stronger within Romance (β= 0.31), suggesting
that this vocal characteristic is particularly relevant to appeal in
this genre. In contrast, vocal shimmer shows no significant ef-
fect on appeal within History. Instead, variation in the Hammar-
berg index, a spectral measure of vocal quality associated with
vocal effort and emotion [45], has the strongest effect on appeal
within History (β=−0.35), compared to a weak global effect
(β=−0.04) and no significant effect on Romance. Further
analysis of outliers is required before drawing firm conclusions
about their influence on appeal (see SM:Fig. 1).
Intra-title: Variation in appeal across narrations of the same
title (0.52) is nearly as large as variation across different ti-
tles (0.54), indicating that narration contributes on a scale
comparable to content-level differences. This underscores the
importance of vocal delivery in influencing listener engage-
ment. This holds even if we limit the data to audiobooks with
more than one version. Furthermore, the mixed-effects model
substantially improves model fit relative to the global GLM
(AIC GLM−AIC LM E = 210). This highlights the impor-
tance of modelling title biases, which likely influence selection
behaviour and page-view rates. Despite the better fit, most fea-
tures that were statistically significant from the global GLM, re-
5880
Table 2:Accuracy [95% CIs] of quartile classification models.
Genres Audio Features Combined
LR 0.31 [0.31, 0.32]0.32 [0.32, 0.33] 0.35 [0.34, 0.35]
MLP 0.31 [0.31, 0.32] 0.30 [0.29, 0.30] 0.32 [0.31, 0.33]
SVM0.32 [0.31, 0.33]0.31 [0.30, 0.32] 0.33 [0.32, 0.34]
XGBoost0.32 [0.31, 0.33]0.29 [0.28, 0.30] 0.31 [0.31, 0.32]
Random 0.25 [0.24, 0.26] 0.25 [0.24, 0.26] 0.25 [0.24, 0.26]
Table 3:Kendall’sτ[95% CIs] for ranking models. VR = view-
rate, RR = return-rate.
Full (VR) Subset (VR) Subset (RR)
NDCG 0.08 [-0.03, 0.17] -0.02 [-0.18, 0.13]0.26[0.11, 0.41]
Pair 0.10 [0.00, 0.20] 0.01 [-0.14, 0.16]0.26[0.11, 0.42]
Lambda 0.13 [0.03, 0.23] 0.02 [-0.13, 0.17]0.28[0.13, 0.42]
LR (group) 0.09 [0.02, 0.15] 0.02 [-0.08, 0.12] 0.08 [-0.01, 0.18]
LR (full) 0.10 [0.03, 0.17] 0.04 [-0.04, 0.13] 0.07 [-0.02, 0.17]
Random 0.00 [-0.15, 0.14] – –
main significant after modelling effects driven by title (SM:Fig.
1). While the magnitude of the coefficients has a small amount
of variation, the directions remain consistent.
4.2. Predictive Modelling Results
Classification: All models performed above the random base-
line of 0.25 (see Table 2). Predicting appeal using acoustic
features alone can improve accuracy by up to 0.07, reinforc-
ing the findings from our GLM experiments: in spite of the
challenging appeal data, acoustic features have a robust predic-
tive power. Genre-only and audio-only models achieved simi-
lar performance, while combining them boosts performance up
to 0.35, indicating that acoustic features and genres capture re-
lated but not identical information. Class-specific analyses fur-
ther reveal that acoustic features capture nuances in the middle
quartiles, whereas genre features contributed more strongly to
predictions at the extremes (see SM:Fig. 2). Simpler models
such as LR and SVM generally outperform more complex ap-
proaches (MLP, XGBoost).
Ranking: All ranking models show a statistically significant
improvement over a random baseline (Table 3), consistent with
the other experiments, confirming an influence of acoustic fea-
tures on appeal. We find that the pointwise models (LR) tend to
perform similarly to other ranking models, even when trained
on the full dataset (which has 10x the amount of samples to
learn from). The ranking models benefit from modelling rela-
tive appeal, as it removes any title-specific biases in preferences.
We note that the performance of the ranking models are sensi-
tive to data shuffling across the folds; further analysis and larger,
more granular data on engagement and appeal will help under-
stand which ranking model is more appropriate for the task.
4.3. Analysis Using Proprietary Engagement Metrics
While LibriV ox view-rate is publicly available, which ensures
that the results in this work are reproducible by all, it is ex-
tremely coarse and has many limitations, as discussed above.
Thus, we recompute our analysis on a subset of LibriV ox audio-
books (Sec. 3.1) that are also hosted on Spotify, for which we
have access to granular consumption data. We replace view-rate
with the proportion of distinct users who return to an audiobook
within 14 days (i.e.return-rate). This metric indicates whether
a listener enjoyed an audiobook enough to return and continue
listening. Return-rate is also biased against shorter recordings,
which may be completed in a single session; developing more
nuanced engagement metrics remains an important direction for
future work. This data is available for 3,428 audiobooks, a sub-
set of the original dataset (8,854 items).
Global GLM:Refi