LightBeam: An Accurate and Memory-Efficient CTC Decoder for Speech
Neuroprostheses
Ebrahim Feghhi ID 1,2,∗,∗∗, Junlin Hu ID 2,∗, Nima Hadidi ID 1,2, Jonathan C. Kao ID 1,2,3
1 Neuroscience Interdepartmental Program
2 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
3 Department of Computer Science
University of California Los Angeles
efeghhi@gmail.com
Abstract
A promising pathway for restoring communication in patients
with dysarthria and anarthria is speech neuroprostheses, which
directly decode speech from cortical neural activity. Two
benchmarks, Brain-to-Text ’24 and ’25, released intracranial
recordings from patients with dysarthria along with a baseline
algorithm trained with Connectionist Temporal Classification
(CTC). Despite significant innovation on these benchmarks, all
leading published prior work relies on a WFST-based CTC de-
coder that requires∼320 GB of RAM. These memory require-
ments limit accessibility for both patients and researchers. Here,
we proposeLightBeam, a non-WFST based CTC decoder that
requires only∼10 GB of RAM and achieves state-of-the-art
performance on both benchmarks.LightBeamachieves this by
integrating an LLM into the beam-search process via delayed
fusion, obviating the prior need for using a large N-gram LM.
LightBeamis implemented in Python and is open-source.
Index Terms: Brain-Computer Interface, Speech Neuropros-
theses, CTC, Delayed Fusion
1. Introduction
Conditions such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), cere-
bral palsy, or brainstem stroke can lead to dysarthria and
anarthria. Dysarthria and anarthria are speech production disor-
ders in which the neural activity generating speech plans in the
motor cortex remains intact, yet the transmission of these mo-
tor plans to the vocal tract or the vocal tract musculature itself
is impaired [1]. These impairments manifest as slow or slurred
speech in dysarthria, and a complete loss of the ability to speak
in anarthria. Speech neuroprostheses offer a promising path to-
ward restoring communication for patients with these disorders,
bypassing the vocal tract by decoding speech directly from neu-
ral activity [2, 3, 4, 5].
Two benchmarks, Brain-to-Text ’24 (B2T ’24; [6]) and ’25
(B2T ’25; [7]), have accelerated the development of speech neu-
roprostheses. Each competition provided intracranial electrode
recordings from the speech motor cortex of a distinct participant
with ALS while they attempted to repeat text prompts. Along
with the neural dataset, the organizers released a baseline algo-
rithm consisting of two components. The first component, the
CTC encoder, converts neural activity into phoneme-level logits
using a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) architecture trained with
CTC loss [8]. The second component, the CTC decoder, con-
verts logits into words by running beam search on a weighted
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
finite-state transducer (WFST) graph integrated with a large 5-
gram LM. Since LLMs cannot be represented as WFST graphs,
an LLM (OPT 6.7B; [9]) rescores beams at the end of the trial.
This CTC decoder requires∼320 GB of RAM.
While significant progress has been made on these bench-
marks, existing top-performing published algorithms rely on the
memory-intensive baseline WFST-based CTC decoder [10, 11,
12]. These memory requirements present a bottleneck for de-
ployment on local, resource-constrained devices. Local deploy-
ment is ideal as it preserves user privacy, minimizes transmis-
sion latency, and maximizes accessibility for patients and the
broader research community.
In this study, we presentLightBeam, an accurate and
memory-efficient CTC decoder for speech neuroprostheses.
The core insight behindLightBeamis that rather than only using
an LLM at the end of the beam search process, we integrate it
within the beam search process (i.e. first-pass decoding) at fixed
time intervals via delayed fusion [13]. By doing so, we reduce
the computational burden of preserving likely beam hypothe-
ses on the N-gram LM, and replace the large 5-gram LM with
a relatively small 4-gram LM.LightBeamreduces memory re-
quirements from∼320 GB to∼10 GB of RAM. Furthermore, it
performs significantly better than the baseline WFST-based de-
coder on both benchmarks when paired with either the baseline
GRU or the time-masked Transformer encoder introduced by
Feghhi et al. [11]. When applying generative error correction,
LightBeamachieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance com-
pared to published results by Zhang et al. [12] (that also use
generative error correction) on both benchmarks. WhileLight-
Beamrequires making more frequent calls to an LLM, real-time
factor (RTF) values are well below 1, so it remains viable for
clinical use. Furthermore,LightBeamis open-source and imple-
mented in Python, making it easily modifiable and deployable
in modern research environments [14].
2. Related Works
Prior work attempted to entirely bypass the WFST-based de-
coder by projecting neural activity into the embedding space
of an LLM, and fine-tuning the LLM to directly generate text
[15, 12]. While this multi-modal LLM approach has been
successful in automatic speech recognition (ASR) [10], it per-
forms substantially worse than the WFST decoder in this con-
text, likely due to small neural dataset sizes [12]. One reason
researchers prioritized building multi-modal LLMs over inte-
grating them into the beam-search process may be that the ma-
jority of open-source CTC toolkits only support N-gram LM
integration [16, 17, 18]. While the Flashlight decoder on Py-
861
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2947
Torch does support neural network integration, it is CPU-based
and thus cannot support LLM inference [19]. Hori et al. [13]
were the first to demonstrate that LLMs could be effectively
used in first-pass decoding without additional projection layers;
however, they released no open-source implementation. Fur-
thermore, their results are shown in the context of ASR with
encoders that output sub-word tokens and are already accurate
without external LM integration. By contrast, CTC encoders for
neural speech decoding typically output phonemes and heavily
rely on external LM guidance due to small dataset sizes.
3. Methods
3.1. Dataset
Our analyses utilize the neural datasets from the Brain-to-Text
’24 (B2T ’24) and ’25 (B2T ’25) benchmarks [2, 4]. The B2T
’24 dataset consists of 12,100 sentences recorded from par-
ticipant T12 over 25 sessions spanning 4 months, using 128-
electrode Utah arrays implanted in the ventral motor cortex.
The B2T ’25 dataset includes 10,948 sentences from partici-
pant T15 across 45 sessions over 20 months, recorded with 256
electrodes in the ventral motor cortex. Across both datasets,
neural features consist of thresholded spike counts and spiking-
band power [20]. These signals were binned in 20 ms windows
and z-scored within blocks. Additional details regarding these
datasets, including train, val, and test split construction are in-
cluded in Section A of our supplementary material [14] as well
as the original studies.
3.2. Encoder models
We trained the baseline GRU encoders using the hyperparam-
eters and codebases provided by the B2T ’24 and ’25 bench-
mark organizers. The B2T ’24 GRU was bidirectional (non-
streaming), while the B2T ’25 GRU was unidirectional. Addi-
tionally, we evaluatedLightBeamusing the time-masked Trans-
former, which outperforms the baseline GRU on B2T ’24 [11]
and achieves state-of-the-art published results when combined
with self-supervised pretraining [12]. For B2T ’24, we log-
transformed the neural data following Feghhi et al. [11]; for
B2T ’25, we utilized the z-scored data provided by the orga-
nizers without further transformation. To address the challenge
of the unbounded KV-cache in self-attention—which compli-
cates clinical deployment—we trained a causal Transformer
with limited left context (see Supplementary Section C). For
all architectures, a final linear layer produced 41 token classes:
39 phonemes, a CTC blank token, and a space token indicating
word boundaries. All encoders were trained using CTC loss.
3.3. WFST decoder
We evaluatedLightBeamagainst the baseline WFST-based de-
coder described by Willett et al. [2]. This approach represents
the logit-to-token mapping (T), the phoneme-to-word mapping
(lexicon,L), and the N-gram LM (grammar,G) as individual
WFSTs, which are pre-compiled into a single, unified graph
(T ◦L◦G). During inference, beam search is performed on
this graph with a pruned 5-gram LM to generate a word lat-
tice, which is then subsequently rescored using an un-pruned
version of the same 5-gram LM. In a final rescoring stage, the
top 100 candidate beams are extracted and scored using OPT
6.7B [9]. These LLM scores are combined with the un-pruned
5-gram LM scores and scaled CTC encoder log-probabilities to
determine the final output. We used the exact decoding hyper-
Algorithm 1:LightBeam
Scaled log-probs∈R T×k
D=α·Log Softmax(encoder logits);
Beams=InitBeams(k,o,|V|);
VecLex=InitVectorizedLexicon(k,|V|,L,T);
Maintain state within word prefix for each beam,∈R k
prefix state=VecLex.Init State();
fort←0toT−1do
Extendkbeams withD[t]to form current scores∈R k×|V|
scores=Fan Out Beams(Beams.scores, D[t]);
scores=Add Token Word Insertion Bonus(scores);
Lexicon mask∈R k×|V| is true for valid extensions. Repeated and
blank tokens are always valid.
lex mask=VecLex.Get Mask(prefix state,
Beams);
scores[¬lex mask]=−∞;
Apply top-k selection and threshold pruning.
scores, indices=select top k(scores);
scores[scores < max(scores) -θ]=−∞;
Update beam states after pruning.
Beams.update(scores, indices);
Update prefix states for beams extending with non-blank,
non-repeating tokens.
prefix state=VecLex.Update(prefix state,
Beams);
Apply shallow fusion w/ N-gram LM, beam scores update in place.
ApplyNGram(Beams, N-gram LM,λ); See Section 3.4.1
Apply delayed fusion with LLM at specified intervals
if(tmodllm rescore interval== 0)∧(t>0)then
ApplyLLM(Beams, LLM); See Section 3.4.2
ApplyFinalLLM(Beams, LLM);
parameters specified by Willett et al. [2] and Card et al. [4] for
the B2T ’24 and ’25 benchmarks, respectively (Supplementary
Section D).
3.4. LightBeam
LightBeamis adapted from the GPU-acceleratedFlexCTCde-
coder [18]. Its operational flow is detailed in Algorithm 1, with
all variables for the algorithm defined in this section or Section
3.3. Hyperparameter values as well as additional technical de-
tails are specified in Supplementary Section E. First, the logits
from the CTC encoder are transformed into a log-probability
and multiplied by an acoustic scale. At each encoder framet,
thekbeams are expanded by adding the scaled CTC encoder
log-probabilities to generatek×|V|candidates. We apply a
token extension bonusβto non-repeating phoneme tokens and
a word insertion bonusγto space tokens. To enable GPU par-
allelization across beams, we represent the lexicon as a state
transition tableTrather than a trie. Each row inTrepresents
a valid word prefix state, and entryT i,j stores the resulting pre-
fix state when observing tokenjat prefix statei, with a desig-
nated “sink state” for out-of-vocabulary transitions. Candidates
are pruned if they violate lexical constraints (i.e. enter the sink
state) or fall below a thresholdθfrom the score of the top beam.
3.4.1. Shallow fusion and homophone trackng with N-gram LM
Phoneme sequences can map onto multiple words, known as
homophones. Selecting the most likely homophone fails to ac-
count for future context; for instance, because “There” is more
likely than its homophone “They’re”, the sentence “They’re
happy.” is not possible to produce under a greedy approach. We
862
Table 1:Combined performance and computational efficiency on B2T ’24 and ’25 benchmark test sets when using the baseline GRU
encoder. Peak RAM and VRAM are reported in GB. Processing speed is measured in RTF using an GeForce RTX 5090 GPU. Lower
is better for all metrics. Mean±SEM acrossn= 10seeds. WFST-based (Orig.) is a single seed result provided by original authors,
and re-implementation (re-impl) values are generated in this study. (∗ sig. better than Orig.,† sig. better than Re-impl.)
Method B2T ’24 B2T ’25
WER RAM VRAM RTF Pub. WER Priv. WER RAM VRAM RTF
WFST-Based (Orig.) 9.76 - - - 6.67 7.00 - - -
WFST-Based (Re-impl.) 9.71±0.08322.9 9.00.05 6.31±0.126.72±0.05317.8 18.10.01
LightBeam (Ours) 9.37∗†±0.089.4 5.60.14 5.77∗†±0.126.47 ∗†±0.0511.6 5.80.06
therefore implement a nested beam search such that each beam
maintains its own topoorthographic (i.e., word-level) beams.
Upon detecting a word boundary, theoorthographic beams are
expanded with the candidate homophones, scored with the N-
gram LM on CPU, followed by top-oselection. Orthographic
beams whose scores are below a threshold,λ, from the top-
scoring beam are further pruned. The current score for beami,
Si, is updated as:
Si←S i +ω·[logP ngram(onew)−logP ngram(oprev )](1)
whereωis the LM weight,o prev is the previous most
likely orthographic beam, ando new is the most likely ortho-
graphic beam after integrating the incoming homophones. We
use the 4.9 GB version of the 4-gram LM trained on 8.6 bil-
lion words with a 100,000 word vocabulary provided by Imag-
ineVille project [21].
3.4.2. Delayed Fusion with LLM
At fixed time intervals (1s and for B2T ’24,1.25s for B2T ’25),
an LLM (Llama 3.2 1B Base; [22], denoted asN) rescores all
(up tok×o) unique orthographic beams in batches using a GPU.
We then replace the N-gram scores with the LLM scores:
Si←S i +ϕ·logP LLM(o′
new)−ω·logP ngram(onew)(2)
whereϕis the LLM weight ando ′
new is the LLM-preferred hy-
pothesis. At the end of the trial, the score of each beam is up-
dated with its most likely end-of-sentence punctuation accord-
ing to the LLM. Prior to delayed fusion, Llama is fine-tuned
on a next-word prediction task using the combined training and
validation sentences across both datasets to adapt it to the par-
ticipant’s text distribution (Supplementary Section F).
3.5. Generative error correction
Following prior work [23, 10, 11, 12], we apply generative error
correction by producing 10 candidate sentences using 10 ran-
dom seeds of the same encoder model, and fine-tuning an LLM
to produce the ground-truth sentence given these 10 candidates.
We follow the same procedure as Feghhi et al. [11], with Llama
3.1 8B Instruct used for generative error correction. Refer to
Supplementary Section G for more details.
4. Results
4.1. Evaluation using baseline GRU encoder
We first utilized the baseline GRU encoder (Section 3.2) to eval-
uate the WFST decoder (Section 3.3) andLightBeam(Section
3.4). The GRU encoder serves as a rigorous test-bed, as the
WFST decoder hyperparameters were previously tuned for its
specific logit distribution. As shown in Table 1,LightBeamcon-
sistently improves Word Error Rate (WER) across both bench-
marks (notably, B2T ’25 reports both public and private WER).
To rigorously assess these gains, we conducted a two-
sided one-sample t-test comparingLightBeam’s performance
across 10 encoder seeds against the official baseline (WFST-
Based Orig.). All statistical tests in this study are two-sided.
LightBeamachieved statistically significant improvements (p<
0.05) on both datasets. Furthermore, we reproduced results us-
ing the WFST decoder across the same 10 seeds; a paired t-
test confirmed thatLightBeamsignificantly outperformed this
re-implementation (WFST-Based Re-impl.,p<0.05).
Regarding resource efficiency (Table 1),LightBeam
achieved a dramatic reduction in peak RAM consumption from
∼320 GB to∼10 GB, while reducing peak VRAM require-
ments by 1.6×and 3.1×for the B2T ’24 and ’25 benchmarks,
respectively. Finally, althoughLightBeam’s mean RTF is higher
than the WFST baseline due to more frequent application of the
LLM, the average RTF remains well below 1. Critically, the
maximum RTF observed across all test trials remained strictly
under 1 on a GeForce RTX 5090 GPU, ensuring suitability for
real-time decoding (Supplementary Section H).
4.2. Generalization to time-masked Transformer encoder
To evaluate whetherLightBeamis effective with other en-
coders, we evaluated its performance using a causal time-
masked Transformer encoder with a bounded KV cache (Sec-
tion 3.2). No additional hyperparameter tuning was done for the
WFST decoder orLightBeamusing the Transformer encoder.
As shown in Table 2,LightBeamalso consistently outperforms
the WFST decoder when applied to the Transformer on both
benchmarks (p <0.05; paired t-test acrossn= 10seeds).
Furthermore, RTF values are lower for both decoders with the
Transformer (Table 2).
We next compared the performance of applying genera-
tive error (GEC) correction with the time-masked Transformer
Table 2:Word Error Rate (%) comparison on the B2T ’24
(WER) and B2T ’25 (Pub. and Priv. WER) benchmarks when
using the causal time-masked Transformer with bounded KV
cache. Mean±SEM overn= 10seeds. ( † sig. better than
WFST decoder).
Method B2T ’24 B2T ’25
WER RTF Pub. WER Priv. WER RTF
WFST-Based 8.36±.120.02 4.95±.264.81±.130.01
LightBeam 8.08†±.120.10 4.44†±.214.59 †±.140.05
863
B2T '24 B2T '25 Private B2T '25 Public
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0Word Error Rate (WER) %
* *
*
*
WFST-Based - Causal
WFST-Based - Noncausal
LightBeam - Causal
LightBeam - Noncausal
Figure 1:LightBeam continues to match or outperform base-
line WFST decoder across all benchmarks when both meth-
ods are paired with generative error correction. Results are
shown with time-masked Transformer. Asterisks indicate signif-
icant improvement when performing paired t-test acrossn= 10
seeds.
when using either the WFST decoder orLightBeam(Section
3.5). We used Llama 3.1 8B for GEC. We include GEC results
with both a causal and non-causal time-masked Transformer,
because Zhang et al. [12] achieved SOTA results (5.10%on
B2T ’24,2.21%on B2T ’25 public) by pretraining a noncausal
Transformer on 367 hours of intracranial data and using GPT
3.5 or GPT 4 for GEC. For both versions of the Transformer,
GEC withLightBeamperformed significantly better than with
the WFST decoder on B2T ’24 and B2T ’25 public (p <0.05;
paired t-test acrossn= 10seeds) and there was no signif-
icant difference on B2T ’25 private (Figure 1). The mean
WER across seeds with the noncausal Transformer was5.01%,
2.36%, and2.08%on B2T ’24 and B2T ’25 private and pub-
lic, respectively (Figure 1). These results are significantly bet-
ter than those of Zhang et al. (p <0.05; one-sample t-test),
establishing a new SOTA relative to published results. Notably,
LightBeamdoes not rely on extensive pretraining or large close-
sourced LLMs. Importantly,LightBeaminnovates on the de-
coder while the performance gains from Zhang et al. stem from
changes to the encoder, and so these research directions are or-
thogonal and complementary.
4.3. Ablations and hyperparameter sweeps
To isolate the impact ofLightBeam’s core components, we con-
ducted an ablation study on the B2T ’24 and ’25 validation sets
using the baseline GRU (Table 3). First, we evaluated the ne-
cessity of delayed fusion by reverting to a traditional pipeline
where the LLM is applied only once at the end of the trial. Re-
moving the continuous LLM rescoring—which occurs at 1 s
and 1.2 s intervals for B2T ’24 and ’25—resulted in significant
performance degradation across both datasets (Table 3), under-
Table 3:Ablation study on B2T ’24 and B2T ’25 validation sets
with baseline GRU. Values are Mean WER (%)±SEM (n= 10
seeds).†denotes significant degradation relative to Full model.
Configuration B2T ’24 WER B2T ’25 WER
LightBeam (Full)14.17±0.086.36±0.05
LLM end-of-trial only 17.17 †±0.058.31 †±0.07
No NWP Fine-tuning 15.89 †±0.097.26 †±0.04
No Phoneme Variants 14.05±0.076.36±0.05
1 5 10 15 20
13.9
14.4
14.9Word Error Rate (WER) %
B2T '24
1 5 10 15 20
6.0
6.5
7.0
B2T '25
0.1
0.4
0.7
0.0
0.2
0.4
Real-Time Factor (RTF)
LLM Rescore Interval (Encoder Frames)
Figure 2:Impact of LLM rescore interval on validation WER
and RTF across both datasets. An encoder frame is output ev-
ery 100 ms in B2T ’24, and every 80 ms in B2T ’25. Shaded
regions indicate SEM acrossn= 10seeds. LLM rescore inter-
val was set to 10 and 15 throughout the study for B2T ’24 and
’25, respectively.
scoring the advantage of integrating the LLM directly into the
first-pass beam search. Next, we ablated the LLM next-word
prediction (NWP) fine-tuning; removing this adaptation also
caused significant degradation, highlighting the importance of
tailoring the LLM to the participant’s specific text distribution.
Finally, we assessed whether permitting multiple phonetic pro-
nunciations per word (Supplementary Section I) improved per-
formance; we found that using only default pronunciations did
not result in significant degradation. We further analyzed the
impact of the LLM rescore interval (Figure 2); increasing the in-
terval generally increased WER while decreasing RTF, demon-
strating a tunable tradeoff between accuracy and latency.
5. Discussion
In this study, we presentLightBeam, a memory-efficient CTC
decoder for speech neuroprostheses that establishes a new
SOTA on the B2T ’24 and ’25 benchmarks with real-time de-
coding speeds.LightBeamachieves these holistic gains by in-
tegrating an LLM into first-pass decoding, reducing reliance
on a large N-gram LM. We identify three primary limitations.
First, whileLightBeamexhibits higher latency than the WFST
baseline, its processing speed on remains within the constraints
required for real-time decoding (RTF<1). Second, because
LLM scores are integrated at fixed intervals, significant diver-
gence between the LLM and N-gram LM scores may cause a
degree of “jitter” in the decoded output. Third, the reliance on
next-word prediction fine-tuning implies thatLightBeammay
require an initial calibration phase to adapt to the idiosyncratic
text distributions of new participants.
Future research could explore several promising directions.
First, it would be valuable to observe if continuous next-word
prediction fine-tuning allowsLightBeamto adapt to a patient’s
evolving linguistic nuances over long-term use. Second, given
that LLMs excel at processing long-range dependencies,Light-
Beammay provide even greater performance gains in long-
context conversational trials. Finally, the modular nature of
delayed fusion allows for the integration of other LLMs, po-
tentially improving accuracy further as open-source models im-
prove (we report limited results with Llama 3.2 3B Base in
Supplementary Section J). By providing an open-source Python
implementation, we hope to enable the research community to
build uponLightBeamto make speech neuroprostheses more
accessible and accurate for patients.
864
6. Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the following awards. To : NSF
CAREER 1943467, NIH DP2NS122037, NIH R01NS121097.
To EF: NIH T32NS115753.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
We used Claude to assist with the implementation ofLightBeam
and all AI-assisted edits were verified by the researchers. We
used Gemini to assist with writing this manuscript to improve
grammar and diction.
8. Author Contributions
E.F.: Conceptualized theLightBeamdecoder framework, de-
veloped the core software implementation, and authored the ini-
tial manuscript draft.J.H.: Implemented the Transformer train-
ing pipeline with limited left-context constraints, helped author
supplementary materials, generated the Figures, and provided
revisions to the manuscript.N.H.: Contributed to the conceptu-
alization of theLightBeamarchitecture and provided revisions
to the manuscript.J.C.K.: Supervised the research, acquired
the necessary funding, and provided revisions to the manuscript.
9. References
[1] A. B. Silva, K. T. Littlejohn, J. R. Liu, D. A. Moses, and
E. F. Chang, “The speech neuroprosthesis,”Nat. Rev. Neurosci.,
vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 473–492, Jul. 2024.
[2] F. R. Willett, E. M. Kunz, C.