A Generalized Formalism of Auto-Regressive Decoding for Speech Processing
Julia Gachot ID ∗∗, Philipp Allgeuer ID , Marie S. Bauer ID , Stefan Wermter ID
Knowledge Technology, Department of Informatics, University of Hamburg, Germany
julia.gachot@uni-hamburg.de, philipp.allgeuer@uni-hamburg.de, marie.bauer@uni-hamburg.de,
stefan.wermter@uni-hamburg.de
Abstract
In speech processing, most state-of-the-art sequence prediction
models rely on auto-regressive (AR) strategies to generate out-
put sequences based on the raw predictions of the model. De-
spite their crucial role in the inference process, a comprehensive
overview of AR strategies as a unified field is lacking, due largely
to implicit and multiple definitions of next-token decoding. This
context complicates the choice, comparison, and evaluation of
strategies, while creating inconsistencies in the characterization
of approaches as auto-regressive or not. We begin by setting
explicit inclusion criteria for the field of AR search in speech
processing, and derive a generalized theoretical framework to
categorize and report on search strategies for neural models. We
show the capabilities of this formalism in simplifying the design
of benchmarks centered around the decoding process, allowing
for ablation studies that are focused on search strategies.
Index Terms: Auto-regressive (AR) models, Generation, De-
coding, Deep Neural Networks (DNN)
1. Introduction
Across language modeling tasks, auto-regressive (AR) neural
networks dominate the state-of-the-art for sequence prediction
[1, 2, 3, 4]. A model’s generation strategy refers to the local
search process towards composing a sequence, through an itera-
tive scoring and updating of partial candidates. These models are
trained to estimate an auto-regressive score from an input and
a prior, which represents the current decoding status. At infer-
ence time, sequences are iteratively constructed to approximate
a local maximum of an objective function, using the model’s
raw predictions. The most commonly used objective function
is Maximum a Posteriori (MAP). It is generally the one used
for beam search [5], where the MAP estimates are combined to
a breadth-first heuristic for the exploration of the search space.
Other heuristics are present in literature, for example, that are
tailored to improve performance on specific speech processing
tasks. In this direction, early strategies proposed variants on the
objective function side, such as sampling [6, 7, 8, 9], which intro-
duces some randomness in the candidates. More recently, from
the modeling side, models called Non-Auto-Regressive (NAR)
often maintain a notion of objective function, but propose a par-
allelized decoding process [10]. The existence of these iterative
sequence prediction methods, which deviates from the classic
left-to-right next-token prediction, raises the question of where
to draw the line between auto-regressive and other approaches.
New search strategies have also appeared in research papers
around major developments in sequence modeling architectures,
such as LLMs. The focus of these papers is often a task, a model,
**indicates the corresponding author.
or a training method, while the inference process is treated more
as an implementation detail.
As some of these decoding strategies are reused across tasks,
they begin to exist in multiple versions (e.g., speculative sam-
pling, NAR sequence generation), creating the need for a consis-
tent way to place and compare methods with existing literature.
The lack of formalization of inference and training schemes
as distinct aspects of modeling, given the drastically different
questions and challenges they represent, has been identified in
literature [11]. It is also reflected on the experimental side, where
evaluating search strategies’ behavior is difficult across speech
processing tasks, and therefore rarely done [4, 12]. To simplify
making these benchmarks, we propose a generalized formalism
to conceptualize and implement AR generation algorithms be-
yond specific tasks and models. This framework aims to move
the field away from the ubiquitous conceptualization of these
approaches as ‘model likelihood maximizers’ at inference time.
Instead, we define AR strategies for neural networks from the
perspective of designing a recurrence relation that efficiently es-
timates sequence likelihood, updates candidates, and determines
when and how to end the iterative process. From this generalized
and modular definition of the steps intrinsic to AR generation
strategies, explicit criteria for a decoding method to be consid-
ered auto-regressive can be derived. We examine cases that are
traditionally viewed as being at the edge of the field, and show
the capabilities of this framework in categorizing approaches in
a systematic way, from the specificities of their structure. Using
the modularity of the proposed formalism, we also demonstrate
how to isolate the contribution of each step to the overall perfor-
mance by proposing an ablation study methodology for sequence
prediction search strategies.
2. Related Work
2.1. AR decoding as a combinatorial optimization strategy
Decoding strategies for neural sequence predictors constitute
a subset of methods for discrete combinatorial optimization,
in which heuristics are used to explore large structured solu-
tion spaces. Several taxonomies propose an overview of these
heuristics, but rarely cover machine learning approaches [ 13],
or only for model optimization [ 14]. In sequence prediction,
taxonomies tend to focus on AR architectures [15], and frame-
works exist to evaluate the compositional capabilities of models
[16], but not their decoding strategies. Without a systematic
comparison framework in this rapidly evolving field, very simi-
lar metaheuristic algorithms are proposed under different names
[14]. This also happens with certain subgroups of neural genera-
tion methods, such as the parallelization of the decoding process
to decrease the number of inference steps, which can be found
under many different names, although speculative decoding is
826
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2768
the most commonly used [17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. One reason may
be that presenting a ‘one-step edit’ is often met with concerns
from reviewers regarding the technical novelty of the approach,
even for papers that later have a high impact [ 7, 22]. Within
the framework proposed in this paper, we compose a general
structure of AR decoding as a modular set of steps to simplify
locating and characterizing contributions within the structure in
both existing and future algorithms.
Even beam search usually does not refer to the original al-
gorithm anymore [5], but has been adapted with variations for
neural networks, especially regarding their termination condi-
tion. Taking for granted the contents of searches creates a risk
of insufficient reporting, which is documented even beyond the
case of generation with neural models [ 23]. By moving away
from presenting strategies as an indivisible block, our frame-
work clarifies the core elements to document when presenting
or using a strategy, detailed in Sec. 3.3. Regarding these steps,
some formalisms in the literature describe beam search as sev-
eral steps being repeated [ 24], but they do not detail how the
estimation could be performed with a sequence prediction model.
For neural models, the formalism of Best-First Beam Search
is general enough to recover some beam search variants, but
it is not designed to encompass stochastic methods [ 25]. Our
formalism encompasses a wider diversity of approaches and is
oriented specifically toward neural models.
2.2. Current categorizations of AR strategies
Without an existing taxonomy, the scope of surveys on AR strate-
gies can be used as a proxy for how strategies are currently
grouped in the literature, as well as for the open questions they
reflect. AR decoding strategies are often surveyed in a task-
specific manner, highlighting a strong task-method association
for certain tasks. In automatic speech recognition (ASR), end-
to-end speech-to-text translation, and grammatical error cor-
rection (GEC), beam search and its variants are the expected
strategies [1, 3, 26]. In machine translation (MT), beam search
also appears as the reference [ 27, 28], although some works
suggest that stochastic methods could also be promising [ 29].
Text-To-Speech (TTS) is a task where NAR models have been
omnipresent over the last five years, with less attention given to
search strategies than in some NLP tasks [30, 2]. In the language
model-based subset of TTS, sampling with temperature is classi-
cally used, like V oiceCraft [31]. For LLM-based generation task
benchmarks, however, beam search is mostly used as a baseline
and is often systematically evaluated against stochastic methods
[32, 4, 33]. This has led to the widespread view of deterministic
and stochastic strategies as two distinct classes of methods, due
to the benefits of randomness in introducing diversity in gen-
erated outputs [34, 35, 22]. We argue that this intuition is no
longer representative of the field. Some non-stochastic methods
generate diverse outputs by penalizing repetitions [ 36], or by
performing a sampling step that, while not involving random-
ness in the process, would exclude them from MAP strategies if
interpreted strictly [24]. As a consequence, findings about AR
strategies across tasks are rarely explored, and the papers that
inspect it demonstrate vast performance differences even within
text generation [4, 37, 38]. In this paper, by adopting a modular
view of these approaches, we propose a formalism that catego-
rizes these searches more reliably, keeping the same structure
regardless of whether the search is deterministic or stochastic, or
tested for a specific task.
3. Generalized Auto-Regressive Formalism
This framework is intended for tasks that can be formalized as
a discrete compositional optimization problem, and more pre-
cisely a stochastic integer problem under probabilistic constraints
(SIPC) [24]. In SIPC, both random variables and decision vari-
ables are integers, which is why outputs are often represented as
an ordered one-dimensional sequence of integers or tokens.
3.1. Assumptions and inclusion criteria
We define a generation approach as a tuple (M, g AR), where
M is a neural model, and gAR its inference algorithm. In the fol-
lowing, we call this tuple an auto-regressive predictor, provided
it fits the following criteria.
Model assumptions.The model is trained to estimate condi-
tional probabilities overA, a finite alphabet or set of tokens.
During inference, the notion of decoding status is leveraged to
estimate the conditional probability through the updating of an
internal state or a prior. The model’s predictions belong toA∗,
the Kleene closure of its alphabet.
Decoding assumptions.The generation process gAR is an itera-
tive local maxima search, designed to be tight [39]. An objective
function (e.g., MAP) is used at least once throughout the process
to inform the updating of a finite set of candidates sampled from
A∗.
3.2. General formalism
Based on the assumptions in Section 3.1, we now define the
core steps of an auto-regressive predictor’s inference algorithm
gAR. In the general SIPC formalism, at each iteration t of
the decoding process, a set of Bt∈N + candidate sequences
Yt ={y b∈A∗|b∈1...B t} is updated. The specificity of
using SIPC strategies with neural models is that estimating the
conditional probability requires a notion of a prior, denoted as
a set Zt, to keep track of the decoding process using various
sources of information. In the simplest cases, Zt coincides with
the set Yt of candidates resulting from the t−1 inference step,
but an alternative state variable is used by some architectures.
While the nature of the priorZt is often evident for a specific
algorithm, proposing a general definition for it is one of the key
levers of our formalism for enabling a systematic comparison
between models and tasks. Additionally, examining if and how a
prior is defined and updated throughout the generation process is
a good proxy to distinguish auto-regressive (AR) strategies from
other local search methods. In the same spirit, instead of defining
an iteration around the evaluation of an objective function, we
outline a modular structure for AR strategies that generalizes
across speech processing tasks. We formalize an iteration t as a
function f t
(M, g AR)(Yt,Z t) that returns an updated prior Zt+1
and set of candidate sequences Yt+1 from the past step output
and prior.
(Yt+1,Z t+1) =f t
(M, g AR)(Yt,Z t),withY t+1̸=Y t (1)
Based on the assumptions of Sec. 3.1, once all of the iterations
f t
(M, g AR) are complete, each of the following four steps has
happened at least once:
1 Estimation.For each candidate, the model M is assumed to
estimate a probability mass function (PMF). The output of this
step isP t, a PMF conditioned onY t andZ t .
Pt+1 :A∗−→[0,1]
a7−→p(a|Y t,Z t) (2)
827
This is often implemented by performing the forward pass of an
input x, post-processing the resulting logits as necessary, and
applying a softmax. In this classic case, the PMF is given by
Pt+1 =softmax(M(x,Z t)).(3)
2 Decision.When a generation approach is auto-regressive,
the model estimation should intervene in refining the candidate
sequence sets. By evaluating an objective function fobj, the
model’s PMF estimates from eq. 2 are aggregated and interpreted.
The highest scoring output according to fobj can then be used
to construct Yt+1. If a sequence is generated from left-to-right,
the decision step consists of evaluating the Bt highest scoring
sequence continuations at+1∈A∗ to the elements ofYt. Based
on this objectivef obj, the candidate sequences become
Yt+1 = B t-argmax
y∈A∗
fobj(y).(4)
The following is expressed with that idea in mind for clarity,
but can easily be adapted to other cases, such as parallelized
generation strategies that do not adopt that implementation. With
a Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) objective, the general decision
step from eq. 4 becomes
Yt+1 = B t-argmax
y∈A∗
X
at∈y
log (Pt(at)).(5)
3 Update of prior .This last step is based on the assumption
that a generation approach is considered auto-regressive if it
includes a mechanism to keep track of the past inference steps.
In the simplest (and most common) case,Zt is a set of sequences
fromA∗. At each decoding iteration t, we have that the prior
passed for the estimation step is exactly the set of candidates Yt,
meaning Zt←Y t. Otherwise, the relation can have a more
complex expression, for example, if the prior is based on the
model’s internal state.
4 Termination test.Finally, a boolean termination con-
dition must ensure that, after a finite number of iterations, the
decoding process terminates. At a given iteration t, that is tested
using
fterm : (A∗)Bt→{0,1}(6)
Yt7→
1if termination condition
0otherwise, (7)
where fterm denotes the function that tests the candidate Yt for
decoding termination.
3.3. Reporting design choices
Within the framework defined in this paper, defining an auto-
regressive decoding strategy gAR consists of making a set of
design choices governing a recurrence relation. This begins with
specifying aninitial condition, i.e., the contents ofY 0 andZ 0.
Then therecurrence relationof eq. 1 can either be the same
at each iteration, meaning defining f 0
(M, g AR) is enough, or if
the recurrence relation evolves throughout the decoding, each
iteration expression is required. Reporting on an iteration t,
means defining theestimation,decision, and/orupdate of prior
steps within f t
(M, g AR), as well as if it includes atermination
test.
3.4. Formalizing classic search strategies
We demonstrate the capability of our framework in encompass-
ing both beam search and sampling by following the reporting
guidelines of Sec. 3.3.
Figure 1:Structure of the most common local search process for
sequence generation with neural models. The formulation of the
iteration f t
(M, g AR)(Yt,Z t) does not depend on the iteration
step t, which is true for beam search and most of its variants. At
each iteration, an estimation, a decision, and an update of the
prior are performed until reaching a satisfying approximation at
the center. The termination condition is defined to reflect what
an acceptable output is for the algorithm at hand.
3.4.1. Beam search
A specificity of beam search is its beam size, the fixed number
B∈N + of candidate sequences in any Yt. Theinitial con-
ditionin beam search depends on the training strategy of M,
the chosen model, e.g., BOS or prompt tokens. Regarding the
recurrence relation, in beam search, all iterations follow the
same template, illustrated in Fig. 1, and contain an estimation
and decision steps followed by a termination test. If the termina-
tion test is negative, the iteration ends with an update of the prior,
or nothing if the test is positive. Eachestimationconsists of
applying the modelM forward pass to the input sample (x) and
prior at t (Yt) to generate logits. The softmax function is applied
to the logits and yields the PMF for step t+ 1, as described in 1 .
Thedecisionis based on the Maximum A Posteriori objective
function of eq. 5. Eachupdate of the priorconsists of setting
Zt+1←Y t+1. Theterminationof beam search is also de-
pendent on the model; for example, the first appearance of an
End-Of-Sequence (EOS) token within the set of candidates can
be a termination test. Once the test is positive, at tend, the most
likely sequence inY tend, is returned as a final output.
3.4.2. Temperature sampling
In sampling with temperature [6, 40], B candidates are updated
at each iteration. Similarly to Sec. 3.4.1, the order and con-
tent of steps within an iteration remain identical throughout the
decoding. For a given model, switching from beam search to
sampling has no influence on the definition of the initial con-
dition, termination and update of prior. Within our framework,
the differences between these two methods are restricted to the
estimation and decision steps. For theestimation, temperature
rescaling introduces a slight difference in the estimation step’s
eq. 3. It becomes Pt+1 =softmax(f T (M(x,Z t))) for fT the
temperature sampling function, applied to the raw logits. At the
828
decisionstep, the aggregated probability estimates are filtered
to keep B2 sequences ranked using MAP, like in eq. 5, except
Bt-argmax becomes B2-argmax. Finally, B sequences from
the resulting set are randomly sampled to composeY t+1.
4. Discussion
4.1. Edge cases
Presented with sequence prediction methods that deviate from
the classic left-to-right next-token prediction paradigm, we
demonstrate how our proposed formalism draws the line be-
tween auto-regressive and other approaches. We look into ten
methods over various speech processing tasks, published be-
tween 2018 and 2025. Among them, half propose a speculative
decoding strategy [17, 18, 19, 20, 21], while the others present
non-AR methods [41, 42, 43, 44, 45]. The principle for inclusion
is to consider a generation approach to be auto-regressive if both
the model and decoding assumptions defined in Sec. 3.1 hold.
Among the ten papers, based on thedecoding assumptions, only
one approach is excluded for not formulating the task as an SIPC
[43]. Themodel assumptionshold for all speculative decoding
methods as well as, perhaps surprisingly, two approaches from
the non-AR group [42, 45].
Based on these assumptions, models that do not estimate a
conditional probability are excluded, even if a mechanism is used
to constrain the coherence of sequence [41]. However, a diversity
of approaches is included, even when using novel variables as
prior for their conditional probability estimation step. These
priors often differ from the usage of those employed in traditional
next-token predictors, or their construction from past candidate
sequence sets Yt, but the overall structure of their generation
process remains analogous. As a result, our framework can
be used to compare traditional methods with algorithms that
do not adopt the default left-to-right decoding process [18, 42],
or do not constrain how far ahead a prior can influence the
conditional probability [ 17, 45]. In addition to relaxing the
aforementionedleft-to-rightandnext-tokenaspects, as long as
the generation is conditional on a decoding status variable, even
using past candidate sequence sets is not mandatory to update
a prior [19, 44]. In addition to methods that can intuitively be
identified as auto-regressive, our proposed framework includes
search approaches that follow a similar structure, making them
comparable to the rest of the field.
4.2. Categorization
As discussed in Sec. 3.2, the proposed framework is designed
to describe and interpret generation strategies as local search by
clarifying their recurrence relation mechanism, as described in
eq. 1. Each of the design choices 1 to 4 that constitute this
relation can also be used to compare methods from the standpoint
of their design choices and structure. Most search strategies
adopt an iteration formulation that does not change over time
as described in Fig. 1, meaning f 0
(M, g AR) is reused at each
iteration t. In that case, the order and individual definition of
steps are enough to describe the generation process entirely, from
which an immediate and systematic step-by-step comparison
can be made to compare generation strategies. Moreover, most
search strategies for neural networks share steps with beam
search or other traditional methods, meaning the nature of the
proposed changes can be located at specific design choices. Note
that various steps propose novel estimation steps [ 20, 44, 6],
decision steps [ 17, 45, 22, 36], or update the decoding prior
novel ways [18, 19, 21]. These categories propose a new angle
on how to group tasks, to complement the classic paradigms of
restricting to a task, or to deterministic or stochastic strategies.
When constructing a benchmark of search strategies that are
compatible with a given model, our framework groups methods
that share a similar location or principle to optimize for speed,
diversity, and so on. For instance, when maximizing diversity, a
TTS strategy based on the MAP objective [36] and a stochastic
decoding method for text generation [22] may not seem relevant
to compare at first glance. However, within our framework, these
strategies share most of their structure, and their contributions
can both be located and understood as decision step variants.
This categorization by steps holds beyond the traditional tasks
and objective functions’ scopes, which allows to compare and to
draw new parallels between existing strategies.
4.3. Prospective ablations for AR decoding
When proposing a new model architecture, it is a common prac-
tice to perform ablation studies. For non-AR architectures, it
often consists of evaluating the individual contribution of a
score or architecture change to inference speed or output quality
[41, 43, 45]. To evaluate generation strategies, similar exper-
iments are sometimes performed by varying hyperparameter
values to limit the effect of a step, such as the termination con-
dition [ 19]. Within the formalism from Sec. 3.2, the added
modularity in the structure can be used for assessing the respec-
tive contributions of novel estimation, decision, update of prior,
or termination condition to the overall performance. Since these
steps are structural components, instead of completely canceling
a step entirely, the ablation is approximated by switching one or
several steps with a baseline equivalent (e.g., the same step from
beam search). The more the results are impacted by the replace-
ment of a step, the more it contributes to overall performance,
similarly to classic ablation studies.
This can help create links with non-AR models ablation
studie