Do speech representational spaces encode language family structures?
Emily Gaughan ID 1, Peter Bell1
1 Centre for Speech Technology Research, The University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
s1906459@ed.ac.uk, peter.bell@ed.ac.uk
Abstract
Learned speech representations are known to contain informa-
tion about the language spoken, but to what extent do they en-
code meaningful language family structure? We believe that
answering this question is important if we are to incorporate
knowledge of language relationships and change into future
speech models, to better represent low resource languages and
non-standard variants. In this paper, we compare approaches to
measuring language family structure in representational spaces,
when encapsulated in the form of phylogenetic trees. We anal-
yse six existing tree comparison methods, demonstrating their
complementary nature, and show that tree-based methods ac-
count for more language family structure than probing clas-
sifiers. We evaluate the representation spaces of six common
speech encoders or LID models, comparing to a linguistic lex-
icostatistical top line, and find interesting differences between
seen representations, particularly with respect to languages not
seen during training.
Index Terms: linguistic phylogenetic trees, speech representa-
tions, language family identification
1. Introduction
Supporting low resource languages and language variation, in-
cluding accents, dialects and non-standard languages, is a pri-
mary concern for developing future-proof, generalisable, multi-
lingual speech models. Many prominent approaches to multilin-
gual modelling still struggle to adapt to limited data to language
variants and unseen relatives of the languages they have been
trained on [1, 2, 3]. There is evidence, however, that speech
and language technology benefit from the inclusion of language
family information, both explicitly – for approximating phone
inventories for low resource languages [4] and adapting ma-
chine translation models [5] – and implicitly, as many large
scale, multilingual, self-supervised models depend on corpora
covering a broad range of language families [6, 7, 8, 9], with
researchers finding that the amount of pre-training data from a
language family predicts performance on unseen languages of
that family [10] and finding links between cross-lingual transfer
performance and phylogenetic distance [11, 12].
We speculate that the positive influence of language fam-
ily information could be because languages vary, change and
emerge in accordance with regular patterns and principles of
which models can take advantage. Evidence of such patterns
and principles can be found in the fields of historical linguistics,
variationist linguistics and dialectology: for example, Trudgill’s
account of dialect formation as a deterministic process where
forms from varieties in contact combine based on their rela-
tive frequencies, ease of production and perception and phonetic
similarity [13], and Mielke’s description of factors influencing
change in phonetic inventories over time, such as maximally
dispersing vowel sounds, or economising feature contrasts for
consonants [14]. Such principles of language change suggest
that there is potential for speech models to use knowledge of
related languages, and general patterns of change to infer more
meaningful representations of languages and variants.
However, the amount of meaningful language family infor-
mation encoded in large speech representations remains under-
explored. In this work, we seek to systematically describe and
quantify the presence language family structure in such spaces,
adopting the concept of thephylogenetic tree. Phylogenetic
trees are hierarchical language family classification structures
produced by comparative historical linguists by examining the
processes through which modern day languages emerged from
past ancestor languages [15]. They go beyond simply group-
ing similar languages, capturing language family relationships
in accordance with shared experiences of change. The concept
of these trees have been used in speech technology applica-
tions in recent times: phylogenetically-informed training data
augmentation has been found to improve speech recognition
[16, 17, 18] and TTS [19, 20]; whilst phylogenetically-informed
parameter sharing [21], and phonetic inventory induction [4]
have improved multilingual speech recognition. To the best of
our knowledge, however, no systematic method for automatic
tree induction or evaluation has yet been conducted on speech.
Though there is no single, uncontested phylogenetic tree
for all of the world’s languages, the current gold standard set
of language family trees is aggregated in Glottolog in accor-
dance with peer-reviewed historical-comparative research [22].
In this paper, we compare phylogenetic trees constructed from
speech representational spaces with the Glottolog classification,
assuming that more similar trees reflect representational spaces
which organise language in accordance with patterns of lan-
guage change.
Existing work has identified some language family infor-
mation in speech representational spaces by visualising speech
data under dimensionality reduction or clustering [23], or by
probing for language family classification [12, 24]. But visual
evidence can be hard to quantify and compare, whilst super-
vised probes may give a distorted view of the salience of lan-
guage family information; and both suffer from restricting anal-
ysis to one level of language family grouping, rather than eval-
uating hierarchical structure. Some work on text based repre-
sentational spaces constructs and evaluates phylogenetic trees
in a similar manner to us [25, 26, 27, 28], though we expand
on these works by: moving to the speech domain; considering
a wide variety of tree distance metrics that have not yet been
applied to trees based on neural representations; comparing to
a lexicostatistical top line; and investigating the link between
unseen languages and language family structure.
5537
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2418
Z
Y
russ1263 bela1254 ukra1253
X
W
bulg1262 mace1250
slov1268
V
U
czec1258 slov1269
poli1260 uppe1395
(a)Path in Glottolog Tree
Z
Y
russ1263 bela1254 ukra1253
X
W
bulg1262 mace1250
slov1268
V
U
czec1258 slov1269
poli1260 uppe1395
(b)Bipartition in Glottolog Tree
.
russ1263
bela1254
ukra1253
slov1269
(c)Quartet in
Glottolog Tree
A
B
D
poli1260 E
ukra1253 czec1258
F
slov1269 G
uppe1395 bulg1262
H
mace1250 slov1268
russ1263 bela1254
(d)Path in Predicted Tree
A
B
D
poli1260 E
ukra1253 czec1258
F
slov1269 G
uppe1395 bulg1262
H
mace1250 slov1268
russ1263 bela1254
(e)Bipartition in Predicted Tree
.
russ1263
bela1254
.
ukra1253
slov1269
(f)Quartet in Pre-
dicted Tree
Figure 1:Visualising tree distance metrics on the ‘slav1255’ subgroup, comparing the Glottolog tree (top row) with the tree predicted
by the Whisper-LID model (bottom row). Figures 1a and 1d show the path between a pair of leaves.PATHdistance compares the
lengths of such paths for all pairs of leaves. Figures 1b and 1e demonstrate bipartitioning the trees at the edges|ZY|and|AB|.
PARTITIONdistance compares pairwise edges and counts how many bipartitions disagree.NYEdistance aligns edges and scores each
aligned pair based on the leaf overlap of the resulting bipartitions. Figures 1c and 1f show the inferred trees from a single quartet of
leaves. Quartet distance compares the quartet topology for each quartet i.e. set of 4 leaves.
Through our analysis we find that merely having large train-
ing datasets and wide coverage of languages does not seem to
bring about phylogenetically structured representational spaces
without additional interventions. We also observe more lan-
guage family structure in the lexicostatistically inferred tree
than representational space trees, suggesting limited language
family structure overall and a need for new strategies to encour-
age models to encode language family structure.
2. Related Work
2.1. Visual Analysis
Many works on judging the language family information con-
tained in speech representations have simply used assessment
by eye to identifying language family information based on the
pre-existing knowledge and intuition of the observer. Following
dimensionality reduction or agglomerative clustering, the ob-
server can judge if there appears to be sensible groupings of lan-
guages and language families in the data. Through visual analy-
sis, it has been observed that neural representational spaces par-
tition languages in certain layers, and sometimes group closely
related languages together in both the text domain [29, 30]
and the speech domain [23, 31]. While visualisation-based ap-
proaches may be a good starting point, most of them consider
the data only at a single level of grouping, typically top-level
family or language identity, which fails to capture the hierarchy
of relationships between languages and language families, and
it is difficult to quantify and compare the degree of language
family information being observed.
2.2. Probing Classifiers
An alternative approach is to probe for phylogenetic and typo-
logical information, typically by training classifiers to predict
the language family [12], geographic location [12] or typologi-
cal features [32, 24, 29]. The most frequently used classifiers
are logistic regression, multi layer perceptrons and k-nearest
neighbours. As with many visual analysis approaches, prob-
ing classifiers are subject to grouping the data at a fixed level
which limits how much probes can tell us about internal struc-
ture and hierarchy. Furthermore, because probes are trained in
a supervised manner, probes which perform better don’t nec-
essarily reflect an increase in language family structure in the
underlying representational space, and probes can be sensitive
to dataset imbalance and data scarcity [33].
2.3. Tree Comparison
There has been prior work quantitatively assessing language
family trees produced fromtextrepresentations via agglomer-
ative clustering. In some cases, authors compare predicted trees
to the Glottolog classification [28]; in other cases [27, 25, 26],
a tree produced computationally based on parallel wordlists is
used as the gold standard [34], though it has been criticised
for not accounting for non-lexical aspects of language change
[15]. Across studies there are differences in the tree compar-
ison metric used, with most works comparing trees based on
pairwise path distances between leaves [25, 26, 27] and one
comparing trees using a metric designed to account for differ-
ences in branching degree [35, 28]. Our work expands upon
previous work by including representations from the speech do-
main, which have the potential to include more natural varia-
tion and visible patterns of sound change. We also consider a
variety of metrics which may account for different aspects of
tree structure, some of which have not previously been applied
to neural language representations. Finally, we are the first to
evaluate family tree structures in neural representations for lan-
guages unseen during the training of the representation.
3. Experimental setup
3.1. Identifying Language Family Structures
We evaluate six tree distance metrics from the domain of evo-
lutionary biology to compare a pair of phylogenetic trees;
5538
Table 1:Evaluating the phylogenetic trees produced by LDND, neural speech encoders and neural speech LID models against the
Glottolog tree using tree distance metrics (↓) and probing classifier balanced accuracy (↑). Avg. Tree Dist is the mean of standardised
PARTITION,QUARTET,PATHandNYEscores.
Avg. Tree Dist PARTITIONQUARTETPATHNYEP-RF P-QUARTET Log reg k-nn LDA
LDND -1.99 314 0.668 32.02 0.517 0.807 0.496 - - -
Whisper-LID -0.80 354 0.713 10.23 0.675 0.95 0.563 26.2 19.3 35.9
ECAPA-LID 0.01 366 0.737 11.34 0.736 0.993 0.601 32.4 15.3 25.1
Whisper 0.15 366 0.761 9.72 0.742 0.993 0.637 17.6 11.8 25.1
XLS-R 0.02 362 0.751 12.47 0.723 0.979 0.622 48.1 16.9 41.7
XEUS 1.14 366 0.781 26.66 0.775 0.993 0.668 5.9 4.8 6.7
mHubert-147 0.25 366 0.731 18.86 0.732 0.993 0.591 52.3 19.7 43.9
schematic diagrams of each metric are illustrated in Figure 1.
PARTITIONdistance, also called symmetric distance or
Robinson-Foulds distance, considers every bipartition of a tree
and checks if it agrees with each bipartition in the other tree
[36, 37, 38]. PATHdistance looks at each pair of leaves, and
counts the number of edges separating them in the two trees
[39]. QUARTETdistance considers every set of 4 leaf nodes and
compares the topology of the trees they infer if you prune all
other nodes [40].
Though widely used, these metrics are limited in terms
of sensitivity and saturation – in the case of PARTITIONand
QUARTET– and dependence on tree shape – in the case of PATH
[41] – which encouraged the development of additional metrics.
NYEdistance was introduced to combat the sensitivity and sat-
uration problems of PARTITIONdistance [42]. It produces an
optimal alignment of internal edges, and scores aligned edge
pairs by the difference in bipartitions they induce. In the com-
putational historical linguistics setting, adaptations of PARTI-
TIONdistance (P-RF) and QUARTETdistance (P-QUARTET)
have been used to combat bias against binary trees [35].
3.2. Data
We use scripted speech data from Common V oice [43] ver-
sion 23.0, which contains speech data from 290 languoids (lan-
guages or variants), as it is freely available under CC-0 licence
and has wide coverage of languages and families, but we ac-
knowledge the limitations of this dataset including recording
condition and demographic differences across languages. We
use only the test sets in order to avoid overlap with training data
for models trained on Common V oice. We remove 15 languoids
which have fewer than 5 utterances in their test set and also, to
facilitate evaluation and comparison, exclude languoids which
do not have corresponding Glottolog or ASJP [44] entries. The
final set contains 230 languoids spanning 26 language families.
We perform our experiments using on 100 utterances sampled
from each language, or fewer in the case that there are not 100
available.
3.3. Constructing Trees from Speech Representations
We perform preliminary investigations of the representation
spaces of the following four multilingual neural speech en-
coders.XLS-Ris a wav2vec2 style model covering 126 lan-
guages pretrained for masked segment reconstruction and fine-
tuned on speech transcription [7].Whisperis an encoder-
decoder transformer model primarily for speech recognition.
It is trained on 97 languages using 680,000 hours of weakly
supervised multilingual multitask data [45].XEUSis an e-
branchformer model trained on over 1 million hours of speech
from 4057 languages with a masked language modelling and
dereverberation objective [8].mHubert-147is a Hubert style
model which combines wav2vec2 architecture with acoustic
unit discovery trained on 90,430hrs of speech from 147 lan-
guages [46]. We also consider the representation spaces of
two spoken language identification models:ECAPA-LIDis an
ECAPA TDNN [47] trained on V oxLingua-107 [48][49], and
Whisper-LIDis the Whisper Turbo decoder [45], the first de-
coding step of which is used to perform language ID.
Our analysis focuses solely on the middlemost layer of each
model, following a compact layer sweep of layers at 25%, 50%
70% and 100% showed that representational space rankings re-
mained mostly stable across layers. We leave layerwise com-
parisons for future work. For each model, we extract hidden
state representations of Common V oice test set utterances, mean
pooled over all frames. For each language, we obtain an aver-
age representation by averaging over 100 utterances, and the
pairwise cosine distances between languages are computed. A
tree is constructed for each model by performing agglomera-
tive clustering using WPGMC linkage criteria. We compare
each predicted tree to the Glottolog tree using the six tree dis-
tance metric defined in Section 3.1. We contextualise our eval-
uations by including a common lexicostatistical approach for
automatically inferring phylogenetic trees from the phonetic
edit-distance of parallel pairs of words from the ASJP database
[44] using ASJP’s Levenshtein Distance Normalised Divided
(LDND) method [50].
4. Results
4.1. Weighted Average Tree Score
As discussed in Section 3.1, each tree distance metric focuses
on slightly different aspects of tree difference. We combine
the z-score normalised tree distance metrics in order to make
preliminary judgements about representation spaces; we ex-
clude P-QUARTETand P-RF as they are directly derived from
QUARTETdistance and PARTITIONdistance. Table 1 shows
that, of the neural speech representation spaces, theWhisper-
LIDspace contains the most language family structure, while
theXEUSspace contains the least, suggesting that broad cov-
erage of language families alone does not bring about language
family structures, perhaps when the training objective priori-
tises other features of the speech signal. The representation
spaces of LID models are generally favoured, suggesting that
a LID objective helps models to learn more complex language
family structures. Overall, however, all neural speech represen-
5539
tations contain markedly less language family information than
the lexicostatistical LDND approach, suggesting that there is
much room for additional phylogenetic content to be incorpo-
rated.
4.2. Tree Distance Metric Agreement
Further insight can be gained by looking at the breakdown of
tree distance scores in Table 1. Considering only the neural
models, all of the tree distance metrics agree thatXEUS en-
coderrepresentations have the least language family structure,
and almost all agree thatWhisper-LIDrepresentations have the
most, with PATHdistance rating it second best. There are clear
disagreements between PATHdistance and the other distance
metrics, in particular in the case ofLDND, which is likely due
to its dependence on tree shape. Investigation into the subtrees
predicted byLDNDrevealed that they tended to be asymmet-
ric which would bring about higher PATHdistance scores than
expected. Though the most and least informative representa-
tion spaces are generally agreed upon, there is some disagree-
ment about the middle-ranked representation spaces motivating
us to look at the tree distance scores of specific families and sub-
groups in the gold standard tree. We observed that tree distance
metrics had high agreement for the Quechuan family and the
Turkik family and its subgroups, among others, while disagree-
ing about Italic family, the Benue-Congo family and others. The
Quechuan family is entirely unseen by the speech models, while
members of the Italic family are always present in their training
datasets. We explore this further in section 4.4.
4.3. Comparison with Probing Classifiers
We compare the judgement of tree distance metrics against stan-
dard probing methods. For these experiments, we train three
kinds of probing classifier to predict top-level language family
from encoded utterances. We evaluate each probe on 10% of
languages, by holding out at least one language per class. As
the classes are imbalanced, we report balanced accuracy, aver-
aging over language family. The final three columns of table 1
show the results. All probes agree thatXEUSrepresentations
lead to worse classification accuracy, which is consistent with
tree distance metrics. However, in contrast to the tree distance
judgements, all of the probing classifiers rank mHubert-147 the
highest. There is notable disagreement between the classifiers
about the rank of the other representation spaces, this observa-
tion, and the disagreement with the tree distance metrics about
the best representation space, is perhaps indicative that probing
methods are not suitable for researchers interested in assessing
hierarchical structure in a way that is consistent with known
language change.
4.4. Seen and Unseen Languages
A representation space which contains strong language fam-
ily structure should be able to embed languages in a structured
way, regardless of whether the language has been seen before or
not. For each model, we determine the languages present (seen)
in its training dataset, excludingXEUS, because of its exten-
sive language coverage, and produce 10 subsamples of 58 lan-
guages, with increasingseen:unseenratios. We construct and
score the resulting trees. Figure 2 shows the weighted aver-
age tree distance score of each model with increasing propor-
tion of seen languages, a flatter curve indicating greater con-
sistency across seen and unseen languages. For most models
we see a clear trend of greater distance associated with more
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Proportion of seen languages
4
2
0
2
4
Avg tree dist ( )
Model
Whisper-LID (p > 0.05)
ECAPA-LID (r = 0.56)
Whisper (r = 0.15)
mHubert-147 (r = 0.58)
XLS-R (r = 0.62)
Figure 2:Graph of weighted average tree distance score against
proportion of languages in the tree which were seen in the
model’s training data, showing an increase in tree distance as
more seen languages are included for all but Whisper-LID. Sig-
nificant pearsonsrreported forN= 70.
seen languages (XLS-R:r= 0.62, p <10 −16;m-Hubert-147:
r= 0.58, p <10 −16;ECAPA-LID:r= 0.56, p <10 −16).
For the whisper encoder and LID representation spaces, we see
weak or no correlation between proportion of seen languages
and tree distance.
5. Conclusions
Our analysis shows that the tree-based metrics generally agree
about which representation spaces contain the most language
family information, though they focus on different aspects of
tree structure. However, our results highlight the weaknesses
of probing approaches for understanding structure in a hier-
archical, rather than discriminative way. We show that broad
language coverage does not necessarily lead to the encoding of
phylogenetic structures, as evidenced by the low scores received
byXEUSdespite over 4000 training languages, perhaps because
XEUS’s training objective optimizes away cues relevant to lan-
guage change.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, we see a link between learning ob-
jective and language family structure, as the LID models have
lower average scores than more general speech encoder mod-
els. Whisper-LID – in which LID is but one component of a
multitask training setup – notably outperforms a standard su-
pervised ECAPA-LID model, though of course the training data
is not comparable. Additionally, we find that in all models ex-
ceptWhisperandWhisper-LID, more structure can be recon-
structed for unseen languages than seen languages. This points
to language partitioning of seen languages as a possible factor
contributing to the limited presence of language family struc-
ture in other models. Finally, we recommend evaluating family
structure in representational spaces using multiple tree distance
metrics in conjunction, such as QUARTETdistance, PARTITION
distance and NYEdistance, for a broader picture of the overall
tree differences, but advise against relying too much on PATH
distance because of its dependence on tree shape.
This work is limited by our focus on a single layer from
each speech model, meaning our results may not generalise
across models as a whole. Differences in architecture, training
paradigm and training data need to be controlled for in more
detailed analyses to isolate the factors which influence the en-
coding of language family structures.
5540
6. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the UKRI CDT in NLP (Grant
EP/S022481/1), the University of Edinburgh.
7. Use of Generative AI Disclosure
During the preparation of this work, the authors used no gener-
ative AI.