Beyond Uncertainty and Diversity: Temporal-Spectral Guided
Active Learning for Audio
Hui Geng1,2, Tianjiao Wan1,2, Yi Su1,2, Qisheng Xu1,2, Hengzhu Liu1, Kele Xu1,2,∗∗
1 College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha, China
2 National Key Laboratory of Parallel and Distributed Computing, National University of Defense
Technology
genghui23@nudt.edu.cn, wantianjiaocom@nudt.edu.cn, suyi97@nudt.edu.cn,
qishengxu@nudt.edu.cn, liuhengzhu@nudt.edu.cn, kele.xu@ieee.org
Abstract
Active Learning (AL) holds significant potential to reduce an-
notation costs for audio signal processing tasks under super-
vised finetuning by strategically selecting informative unlabeled
samples for labeling. However, existing AL methods typically
rely on general selection criteria such as uncertainty or repre-
sentativeness, which fail to account for the intricate temporal-
spectral structures inherent in audio signals. These structures
play a critical role in determining sample informativeness, mak-
ing direct application of existing AL approaches suboptimal for
audio tasks. To address this limitation, we propose a novel AL
framework for audio, named Temporal-Spectral Active Learn-
ing (TSAL), explicitly bridging the gap between model opti-
mization and audio characteristics. Since temporal-spectral pat-
terns cannot be directly extracted or explicitly defined, TSAL
constructs these informative patterns by modeling the soft-loss
distribution. Furthermore, it incorporates feature-gradient simi-
larity to guide the selection of unlabeled samples that exhibit
these distinctive patterns. Extensive experiments on several
audio benchmarks demonstrate that TSAL consistently out-
performs state-of-the-art AL methods, significantly improving
sampling efficiency and effectiveness under limited annotation
budgets, while highlighting the importance of temporal-spectral
guidance for advancing audio AL.
Index Terms: Active Learning, Audio Signal Processing, In-
formative Patterns, Temporal-Spectral Structure
1. Introduction
Supervised finetuning (SFT) has achieved significant success
across various signal processing tasks [1, 2], including environ-
mental sound classification [3, 4], speech recognition [5, 6, 7],
underwater acoustic signal recognition [8, 9], and urban sound
classification [10, 11]. Despite their effectiveness, the perfor-
mance of these data-driven models relies heavily on large-scale
labeled datasets. Consequently, the acquisition of high-quality
annotations has become a major bottleneck due to the labor-
intensive and time-consuming nature of manual labeling for
complex audio signals. Therefore, identifying informative au-
dio samples under a limited annotation budget is a key chal-
lenge [12, 13, 14].
Active Learning (AL) presents a promising solution to this
data efficiency problem [15, 16]. By iteratively selecting a sub-
set of informative samples from a large unlabeled pool for an-
notation, AL aims to maximize model performance while min-
imizing the labeling burden [17, 18]. As illustrated in Figure 1,
**indicates the corresponding author.
Figure 1:Illustration of the existing AL framework for audio.
typical AL methods establish a cyclic feedback loop between
sample selection and model training, where the model is up-
dated continuously as new annotations are acquired.
Despite progress in general computer vision and natural
language processing, the application of AL in audio signal pro-
cessing remains largely underexplored. A fundamental premise
of effective AL is the ability to recognize and prioritize distinc-
tive informative data patterns [19, 20]. In the audio domain,
these patterns are intrinsically manifested as temporal-spectral
structures (e.g., transient events, harmonic continuity, and fre-
quency modulation) [21]. However, existing AL strategies typ-
ically rely on generic metrics such as predictive uncertainty or
geometric diversity [22]. These methods often treat audio in-
stances as static vectors, overlooking the distinctive temporal-
spectral structures that drive audio complexity. This misalign-
ment leads to suboptimal sample selection, highlighting the
need for AL approaches that explicitly exploit such structure-
specific information [23, 24].
To address these limitations, we design the sample selec-
tion process to align with the temporal-spectral characteristics
of audio. However, these complex informative patterns can’t be
hand-defined or directly extracted from spectrograms. To over-
come this, we propose an implicit approach to capture these
structures. Instead of manually defining what constitutes an in-
formative pattern, we leverage the model’s own optimization
behavior as a proxy. Specifically, we first profile the informa-
tive patterns by modeling the soft-loss distribution of labeled
samples [25], under the assumption that samples yielding spe-
cific loss distributions encapsulate the hard-to-learn temporal-
spectral structures we seek. Building on this, we introduce a
feature-gradient similarity mechanism. By measuring the gra-
dient alignment between these labeled pattern anchors and the
unlabeled pool, we can effectively identify unlabeled samples
7034
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1719
that share similar optimization trajectories and, by extension,
similar challenging temporal-spectral characteristics.
The key contributions of this work are summarized as fol-
lows:
• We propose Temporal-Spectral Active Learning (TSAL), a
flexible and plug-and-play AL framework tailored for audio
tasks, which shifts the focus from generic uncertainty metrics
to audio-specific structural guidance.
• We design a novel sampling strategy that characterizes infor-
mative patterns via soft-loss distribution modeling and lever-
ages feature-gradient similarity to guide the selection of un-
labeled data.
• We conduct extensive experiments on multiple audio clas-
sification benchmarks. The results demonstrate that TSAL
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art AL methods, signif-
icantly improving selection effectiveness under constrained
annotation budgets.
2. Related Work
Active Learning aims to reduce annotation costs in audio clas-
sification by strategically selecting informative unlabeled sam-
ples [26]. Existing approaches are commonly divided into
diversity-based and uncertainty-based methods.
Diversity-based strategies seek to maximize the coverage
of the underlying data distribution. For example, coreset sam-
pling [27] leverages geometric properties to select representa-
tive samples by minimizing the covering radius. Uncertainty-
based methods instead prioritize samples with the highest pre-
dictive uncertainty, typically using criteria such as least con-
fidence, entropy, or margin sampling. For instance, [28] ex-
plored sparse-instance and least-confidence strategies for bird
sound classification, while [29] proposed a pool-based frame-
work with alternating confidence sampling. More recent works
include [30], which leveraged the divergence between long-
and short-term memory models for uncertainty estimation, and
BALD [31], which quantified informativeness via the mutual in-
formativeness between model parameters and predictions. Fur-
thermore, gradient-based methods have emerged to capture both
uncertainty and diversity. For example, BADGE [32] utilizes
the magnitude and direction of hypothesized gradients in the
final layer to select diverse and difficult samples.
Unlike existing AL methods, our method does not rely
on generic uncertainty metrics or simple geometric diversity.
Instead, we argue that the informativeness of audio samples
is rooted in specific temporal-spectral patterns. We explicitly
model the soft-loss distribution of labeled data to profile these
informative patterns and leverage feature-gradient similarity to
align unlabeled samples with them. This allows TSAL to per-
form targeted sampling based on audio-specific structural com-
plexity rather than generic statistical heuristics.
3. Methodology
3.1. Overall Framework
LetD L ={(x i,y i)}N
i=1 andD U ={x j}M
j=1 denote the la-
beled and unlabeled datasets, respectively, whereN=|D L|
andM=|D U|. AL aims to iteratively select an informative
subsetB⊂D U for annotation, which is then added toD L to
enhance model performance within a limited annotation budget.
This process continues until the annotation budget is exhausted.
In this work, we instantiate the modelf M with self-supervised
audio spectrogram transformer (SSAST) [1]. At each AL cy-
cle, the model is finetuned on current labeled dataD L with the
standard cross-entropy loss:
LM = 1
N
NX
i=1
CE(pi(xi),y i),(1)
wherep i(xi) =softmax(f M(xi;θ M)),θ M is the model pa-
rameter, andy i is the ground-truth label for the labeled sample
xi.
Standard AL methods often neglect the intrinsic temporal-
spectral structures of audio, which are critical for determin-
ing sample informativeness. To bridge this gap, we propose
Temporal-Spectral Active Learning (TSAL), a novel framework
that improves the selection of informative samples by lever-
aging the temporal-spectral structure of audio signals. As il-
lustrated in Figure 2, TSAL operates on a profile-and-match
principle. The temporal-spectral informative patterns are iden-
tified based on the soft-loss distribution from labeled set, which
captures the temporal and spectral structure of the audio data.
The patterns guide the process of sample selection through
feature-gradient similarity. TSAL effectively utilizes the tem-
poral–spectral structure inherent in audio signals, improving the
effectiveness of the annotation process.
3.2. Temporal-Spectral Informative Pattern
Although incorporating temporal-spectral patterns is crucial for
data selection, explicitly defining rules to extract such complex
structures is intractable. To overcome this, we implicitly model
the soft-loss distribution on labeled data (Figure 2) to iden-
tify pattern-rich samples. Inspired by the principle that high-
loss samples contain richer informativeness for model refine-
ment [25], we posit these samples exhibit essential temporal-
spectral patterns, which directly guides the selection of simi-
larly informative samples from the unlabeled pool.
Specifically, at theT−thiteration, we first model soft-loss
distribution via the soft lossL T (xi)of each labeled samplex i
inD T
L. Based on the distribution, we define a soft selection
policy to filter for informative anchors for labeled samples:
PT (xi) =
(
L′
i, L T (xi)≥ ¯LT,
0, L T (xi)< ¯LT, (2)
whereL′
i is the normalized loss for samplex i and ¯LT is the
average soft loss. Based on the policyP T (xi), we sample
high-loss candidatesL H, which are presumed to contain the
most desirable temporal-spectral informative patterns. These
temporal-spectral patterns, based on the soft-loss distribution,
capture structurally informative signals and are used to guide
subsequent sample selection for annotation, ensuring a more ef-
ficient and effective annotation process.
3.3. Pattern-Guided Sample Selection
Given the temporal-spectral structure patternsH, TSAL eval-
uates the informativeness of each unlabeled samplex j∈D U
through feature–gradient similarity. For each labeled sample
xk ∈L H, we extract the feature embeddinge k, and the gra-
dient vectorg k.e k andg k provide a detailed representation
of the temporal and spectral structure, yielding the representa-
tion(e k,g k). For each unlabeled samplex j, we extract its fea-
ture embeddinge j using SSAST. The gradient representationgj
is then estimated by computing the loss against pseudo-labels,
which are derived from prediction logits. Specifically, the log-
its are converted into pseudo-labels, the loss is computed with
7035
Figure 2:Overview of TSAL framework. In each iteration, the model is finetuned on labeled data, and then the temporal-spectral
informative patterns are identified based on soft-loss distributions from labeled set. Unlabeled samples are then evaluated through
feature-gradient similarity to the patterns, guiding the more effective sample selection and improving annotation efficiency under
limited labeling budgets.
Algorithm 1Temporal-Spectral Active Learning
Input: Labeled setD L, unlabeled setD U ; iterationsC; modelf M ;
coefficientsα,β.
1:foriterationT= 1,...,Cdo
2: Fine-tune modelf M on labeled setD T
L using cross-entropy
loss (1)
3: Identify informative patterns from labeled data based on soft se-
lection policy (2).
4: Extract feature embeddinge k and gradientg k forL H
5:foreach unlabeled samplex j∈D U do
6: Extract feature embeddinge j forx j using SSAST
7: Estimate gradientg j forx j
8: Calculate selection scoreS j through feature-gradient similar-
ity (3)
9:end for
10: Select query setQ T by sampling top-Bcandidates based onS j.
11: Obtain labels for the selected queries ¯QT via annotators.
12: Update labeled set:D T+1
L ←D T
L∪ ¯QT .
13: Update unlabeled set:D T+1
U ←D T
U\Q T .
14:end for
respect to these pseudo-targets, and gradients with respect to
the input are obtained through back-propagation, yielding the
representation(e j,g j).
The similarity between(e j,g j)and each(e k,g k)inL H is
computed by combining feature-gradient cosine similarity. The
selection score forx j is defined as
Sj = max
k≤NH
[cos(ej,e k) +β·cos(g j,g k)],(3)
whereβcontrols the relative importance of feature and gradient
similarities andN H is the size ofL H.
After computing the selection scoresS j for all unlabeled
samplesx j ∈D U , we rank the unlabeled samples based on
their scoresS j and the topBare selected for annotation. These
samples are then added to the labeled setD L, and the model
is finetuned for the next AL iteration, continuing the process of
improving model performance.
TSAL enhances AL for audio signals by identifying
temporal-spectral informative patterns from labeled data. These
patterns are used to guide sample selection through feature-
gradient similarity, ensuring that the more informative samples
are prioritized for annotation. This approach improves sample
selection efficiency and model performance under limited anno-
tation budgets, outperforming existing AL methods that neglect
the temporal-spectral structure of audio signals. The complete
procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1.
4. Experiment
4.1. Implementation Details
We evaluate the proposed method on four benchmark
datasets: ESC-50 [3] (single-label, 2,000 5-second environ-
mental recordings across 50 classes), TUT Acoustic Scenes
2016 (DCASE2016) [33], AudioSet-20k [34] (multi-label, 527
classes), and UrbanSound8K [11] (10-fold cross-validation).
TSAL is compared with several representative AL methods
in audio tasks, including softmax confidence (CONF) [35],
margin (MARGIN) [36], entropy (ENTROPY) [37], coreset
(CORESET) [27], Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement
(BALD) [31] and CLS-AL[30]. Random sampling (RANDOM)
is also included as a baseline. The initial labeled pool contains
10% of randomly selected samples.
Following prior work [30], we adopt consistent training set-
tings across datasets. For AudioSet-20k and ESC-50, the initial
learning rates are set to5×10 −5 and1×10 −4, respectively.
The models are finetuned for 25 epochs with a batch size of 12
on AudioSet-20k, and for 50 epochs with a batch size of 32 on
ESC-50. For DCASE2016 and UrbanSound8K, we follow the
same configuration as ESC-50, with batch sizes adjusted to 16
and 32, respectively. In each AL cycle, 5% of the total unla-
beled samples are queried, labeled, and added into the labeled
set for model finetuning. This process is repeated until 40% of
the budget is exhausted. To ensure the robustness of the experi-
mental results, we repeat each experiment three times or employ
k−foldcross-validation.
4.2. Experimental Analysis
Main Results:Figure 3 presents the performance comparison
of TSAL against baseline methods under different labeling bud-
gets. On the balanced ESC-50 dataset, TSAL demonstrates
superior data efficiency, achieving an accuracy of 82.65%.
This represents a substantial margin of 2.75% over the RAN-
DOM baseline (79.90%), indicating TSAL’s ability to rapidly
identify representative temporal-spectral patterns even in stan-
dard acoustic environments. TSAL’s advantages become even
more pronounced on challenging, high-complexity datasets. On
the large-scale, multi-label AudioSet-20k, TSAL achieves a
mean Average Precision (mAP) of 22.08% using only 40%
of the labeling budget, significantly outperforming RANDOM
(19.89%). Similarly, on the UrbanSound8K dataset, which
suffers from class imbalance, TSAL attains 82.54%, and on
DCASE2016, it reaches 79.23%, consistently surpassing the
baselines. These results demonstrate TSAL’s robustness in miti-
gating the impact of noisy environments and skewed data distri-
7036
40
50
60
70
80
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Performance
% of labeled samples
ESC-50
MARGIN
CONF
ENTROPY
CORESET
BALD
CLS-AL
RANDOM
TSAL
5
10
15
20
25
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
% of labeled samples
AudioSet-20K
MARGIN
CONF
ENTROPY
CORESET
BALD
CLS-AL
RANDOM
TSAL
45
55
65
75
85
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
% of labeled samples
DCASE 2016
MARGIN
CONF
ENTROPY
CORESET
BALD
CLS-AL
RANDOM
TSAL
Figure 3:Performance (%) of different AL approaches on multiple benchmark datasets.
Table 1:Ablation study analyzing the impact of different components of TSAL on multiple datasets.
Soft Selection Policy Feature Similarity Gradient Similarity ESC-50 AudioSet-20K DCASE2016 UrbanSound8K
✕ ✓ ✓79.35 20.34 77.52 80.25
✓ ✕ ✓79.95 20.42 75.30 81.13
✓ ✓ ✕81.10 20.59 76.15 81.35
✓ ✓ ✓82.65 22.08 79.74 82.54
butions. Crucially, TSAL maintains a distinct performance lead
even under extremely limited labeling budgets (e.g.,≤30%).
highlighting its effectiveness of using feature-gradient similar-
ity to maximize information gain when labeled data is scarce.
Across all benchmarks, TSAL consistently dominates, validat-
ing its generalization ability and potential for reducing annota-
tion costs in diverse audio signal processing tasks.
Ablation Study:To verify the individual contribution of
each component within the TSAL framework, we conduct a
comprehensive ablation study across multiple datasets. The
quantitative results, summarized in Table 1, indicate that the
Soft Selection Policy, Feature Similarity, and Gradient Similar-
ity are all indispensable for the system’s effectiveness. First, we
analyze the Soft Selection Policy. When this policy is removed
(i.e., patterns are randomly selected from the labeled pool in-
stead of being guided by soft-loss), the accuracy on ESC-50
drops significantly by 3.3%. This sharp decline confirms that
not all labeled samples are equally valuable and the need of
leveraging temporal-spectral structure via identifying temporal-
spectral informative patterns from labeled samples. Second,
we isolate the effects of the matching criteria. Removing Fea-
ture Similarity or Gradient Similarity leads to consistent per-
formance deterioration. For instance, on DCASE2016, exclud-
ing feature similarity causes a drop from 79.74% to 75.30%,
while on UrbanSound8K, lacking gradient guidance results in
a decrease from 82.54% to 81.35%. These results demonstrate
that relying on a single metric is insufficient. The feature sim-
ilarity ensures semantic consistency, while gradient similarity
aligns the optimization trajectory. By integrating these mod-
ules, the full TSAL framework captures informative temporal-
spectral patterns and accurately maps them to unlabeled data,
substantially outperforming all ablated variants. This highlights
the synergistic effect of our proposed components.
Parameter Sensitivity Analysis:To assess the robustness
of our framework, we investigate the sensitivity of TSAL with
respect to the hyperparameterβon the ESC-50 dataset.βmod-
ulates the relative weight of the gradient similarity term, in-
troducing optimization-aware guidance into the selection pro-
cess. As reported in Figure 4, the model performance exhibits
remarkable stability across a wide spectrum ofβ. This ob-
81
82
83
0.1 0.5 1 5
Performance
𝜷
Figure 4:Sensitivity analysis of TSAL on the ESC-50 dataset.
servation confirms that TSAL is not brittle to hyperparameter
settings, making it practical for real-world deployment without
the need for extensive tuning. Empirically, we find that setting
β= 1.0consistently yields the optimal performance, suggest-
ing that treating the semantic features and gradient signals with
equal importance provides the most effective representation of
temporal-spectral patterns. Thus,β= 1.0is adopted as the
default setting in our main experiments.
5. Conclusion
We proposed TSAL, a novel Active Learning framework that
shifts sample selection from generic metrics to temporal-
spectral structural guidance. By constructing informative pat-
terns via soft-loss modeling and matching them through feature-
gradient alignment, TSAL effectively identifies high-value sam-
ples that challenge the model. Empirical results on multiple
benchmarks confirm that TSAL significantly reduces annota-
tion costs while outperforming existing baselines. These find-
ings underscore the necessity of integrating temporal-spectral
structure into audio AL tasks. In the future, we intend to gen-
eralize structure pattern mechanism to audio-language tasks to
capture cross-modal structural patterns, thereby maximizing the
utility of the massive unselected data pool.
7037
6. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by National Science and Technology
Major Project (2023ZD0121101), National University of De-
fense Technology (ZZCX-ZZGC-01-04).
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used solely for language editing and
manuscript polishing. All authors reviewed, verified, and take
full responsibility for the content of this paper.