ASR-Synchronized Speaker-Role Diarization
Arindam Ghosh ID 1,∗∗, Mark Fuhs1, Bongjun Kim1, Anurag Chowdhury1, Monika Woszczyna1
1 Solventum Health Information Systems, USA
aghosh4@solventum.com, mark.fuhs@solventum.com, bkim11@solventum.com,
achowdhury2@solventum.com, mwoszczyna@solventum.com
Abstract
Speaker-role diarization (RD), e.g., doctor vs. patient, is often
more practically useful than conventional speaker diarization
(SD), which assigns generic labels, e.g., speaker-1, speaker-2.
For joint ASR+RD, the current best model uses a single trans-
ducer to serially predict words and roles (at speaker turns), but
at the cost of degraded ASR performance. To address this, we
adapt a recent dual-transducer ASR+SD model for ASR+RD.
We first show that SD and RD are fundamentally different
tasks, exhibiting different dependencies on acoustic and linguis-
tic cues. We then propose (1) task-specific predictors, (2) use of
higher-layer ASR encoder features as input to the RD encoder,
and (3) cross-entropy loss along the 1-best ASR path instead
of the full RNNT loss. Experiments on a public and a private
dataset of doctor-patient conversations show that our method
outperforms the best baseline by relative6.2%and4.5%, re-
spectively, in role-based word diarization error rate (R-WDER).
Index Terms: ASR, diarization, speaker-role, transducer
1. Introduction
In multi-speaker conversations such as doctor-patient encoun-
ters, lawyer-client interactions, ASR captures “what was spo-
ken,” while SD determines “who spoke when.” Similarly, joint
ASR+SD aims to determine “who spoke when and what,” im-
proving the intelligibility of otherwise lengthy and unstructured
transcripts and supporting downstream natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) tasks, such as summarization and information
extraction, by providing more accurate and meaningful insights.
An issue with SD is that it assigns generic labels (e.g.
speaker-1, speaker-2) without any prior knowledge of their
identities [4]. For real-world applications, such as summa-
rization, identifying thespeaker-role(doctor, patient, lawyer,
client, etc.) is more valuable than knowing arbitrary speaker la-
bels. Although one can utilize external speaker profiles to map
the generic labels to actual speakers, enabling role inference,
such external data is often unavailable. In these scenarios, joint
ASR+RD becomes crucial.
An approach to RD is to infer roles directly from ASR tran-
scripts [5–7]. Large language models (LLMs) have also been
shown to be effective for this task to some extent [6, 7]. How-
ever, it is well established that text-only approaches generally
underperform methods that leverage both textual and acous-
tic information [8–10]. Text-only methods struggle when tran-
scripts lack distinguishing linguistic cues, such as in short back-
and-forth utterances (e.g., “yeah”, “right”), when speakers use
similar vocabulary, or when ASR error rates are high. In these
situations, incorporating acoustic information becomes essen-
tial for reliable role separation [9].
**indicates the corresponding author.
Existing approaches that combine both acoustic and lin-
guistic information for RD [8, 11–14] fall into two categories:
modular and end-to-end models. Modular systems, such as
[13], use role-oriented language models for classification, re-
fined with x-vector clustering. Similarly, [8] integrates a BERT-
based classifier with role-constrained x-vector clustering. Early
work on end-to-end models employed a transducer model to
jointly perform ASR+RD by inserting role tokens at speaker
turns in the training text [1], and further explored unified
ASR+RD models for air traffic control conversations [14]. The
end-to-end models offer flexibility in that they can be used
either as standalone systems or as components within larger
modular frameworks. For example in [15] and [16], end-to-
end ASR+SD/RD models are integrated into modular pipelines.
Motivated by this flexibility and complementary nature, in this
paper, we focus on end-to-end ASR+RD models.
Integrating ASR and RD into an end-to-end model poses
its own challenges. Direct multitask learning leads to ASR
performance degradation [1, 16], a concern also noted for joint
ASR+SD [2,17]. To mitigate this, [17] trained the ASR and the
turn-prediction transducers separately to preserve the word er-
ror rate (WER). For joint ASR+SD, [2] addressed this by freez-
ing the ASR transducer and training an auxiliary SD transducer
synchronized via blank logit sharing (ASR-synchronized SD),
a technique also adopted in [3] for speaker-attributed ASR.
In this paper, inspired by the success of the ASR-
synchronized SD model [2], we propose an ASR-synchronized
RD framework that predicts a speaker role synchronously for
each ASR-generated word. This proposal is not straightfor-
ward, as we demonstrate that speaker diarization and role di-
arization are fundamentally different tasks, requiring distinct
acoustic and linguistic contexts, as well as appropriate archi-
tectural modifications and adjustments to the training strategy.
The novel contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
1. We provide, to the best of our knowledge, the first analysis
of the relative importance of acoustic and linguistic modali-
ties for joint ASR+RD. While SD relies mainly on acoustic
differences, the relative contributions of these modalities for
RD (simultaneous speaker differentiation and role inference)
are not immediately clear. Our results establish that RD relies
more heavily on linguistic cues than on acoustic features.
2. Based on this, we modify the ASR-synchronized SD ar-
chitecture to inject more linguistic information into the RD
transducer. This is achieved through (1) task-specific pre-
dictors (CNN for ASR and RNN for RD) and (2) the use of
higher-layer ASR encoder features as input to the RD trans-
ducer. These proposals lead to substantial relative R-WDER
reductions of19.23%on the private DoPaCo dataset and
54.5%on the public SiMeCo dataset (described in Section 4).
5282
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-880
(a)Role-ASR [1].
 (b)ASR-Synchronized SD [2, 3].
 (c)ASR-Synchronized RD.
Figure 1:Prior work in (a) and (b), and our proposed RD training in (c), for an audioxwith ground-truth label sequences:y Role-ASR =
[hello,there,DOC,hi,PAT],y ASR = [hello,there,hi],y SD = [s 1,s 1,s 2], andy RD = [DOC,DOC,PAT]. Blue colored ASR modules
remain frozen during the training of auxiliary SD and RD transducers. The graphs at the top of each network shows the alignment
paths used to compute the training loss. In (c), the path with bold arrows represent the 1-best forced-alignment path.
3. For training the RD transducer, we replace the blank-shared
RNNT loss of ASR-synchronized SD with a cross-entropy
loss computed along the 1-best forced-aligned ASR path.
This not only simplifies training, reducing compute and
memory costs, but also achieves additional relative R-WDER
reductions of3.2%on DoPaCo and16%on SiMeCo.
2. Preliminaries
In this section, we revisit the Role-ASR [1] and ASR-
synchronized SD [2] models that serve as baselines for this
paper. Letϕbe the blank token,{w 1,...,w NASR}de-
note the set of subwords,{s 1,...,s NSD}the set of speakers,
and{r 1,...,r NRD}the set of speaker-roles, whereN RD ≤
NSD. Let a transducer model be denoted byM, where
M∈ {Role-ASR,ASR,SD,RD}as shown in Figure 1. For
a given audiox= [x 1,...,x T ]and the ground-truth la-
bel sequencey= [y 1,...,y U ], let theM-encoder’s out-
put be[f M
1 (x),...,f M
T (x)]and theM-predictor’s output be
[gM
1 ,...,g M
U ], wheref M
t ∈R Nf andg M
u ∈R Ng , withtandu
denoting the frame and label indices andN f andN g represent-
ing the encoder and predictor dimensions, respectively. Then,
M-joiner’s raw logitsj M
t,u are given by
hM
t,u =P M·f M
t (x1:T ) +Q M·g M
u (y1:u−1) +b M
h (1)
jM
t,u =A M·tanh(h M
t,u) +b M
s ∈R|VM| (2)
whereP M,Q M andA M are projection matrices,b M
h andb M
s are
bias terms, and|V M|is the vocabulary size. LetA(y)be the set
of all possible alignments betweenyandx, more specifically
betweenyandf M
1:T (x).
2.1. Baseline 1: Role-ASR [1]
RNNT model [18] was originally proposed for ASR as an im-
provement over the CTC model. Shafey et al. [1] first used
it for joint ASR and RD by inserting role tokens at the end
of each speaker’s turn, e.g.y= [hello,there,DOC,hi,PAT],
and training directly using the RNNT loss, as shown in Fig-
ure 1a. For this model, using Equation 1 and 2, the prob-
ability distribution over the vocabularyˆy t,u ∈ VRole-ASR =
{w1,...,w NASR}∪{r 1,...,r NRD}∪{ϕ}is
P(ˆyt,u|x1:T,y 1:u−1) =softmax(j Role-ASR
t,u ),
and the RNNT loss for labelyabove is given by
LRNNT =−lnP(y|x 1:T ) =−ln
X
a∈A(y)
P(a|x1:T )
=−ln
X
a∈A(y)
Y
ˆyt,u∈a
P(ˆyt,u|x1:T,y 1:u−1).(3)
We use this model with an RNN predictor as our first baseline
system B1: Role-ASR (RNN) in Table 2.
2.2. Baseline 2: ASR-Synchronized SD [2]
Huang et al. [2] introduced an ASR+SD model that jointly pre-
dicts words and corresponding speaker labels using two syn-
chronized hybrid auto-regressive transducers (HAT) [19], as
shown in Figure 1b. First, the ASR transducer is trained in-
dependently using the vocabularyV ASR ={w 1,...,w NASR}∪
{ϕ}. Using Equation 1 and 2, the probabilities of blank and
non-blanks,ˆyt,u∈V ASR, are given by
P(ˆyt,u =ϕ|x 1:T,y 1:u−1) =sigmoid(j ASR
t,u [0]) =:b t,u (4)
P(ˆyt,u =w i|x1:T,y 1:u−1) = (1−b t,u)·softmax(j ASR
t,u [i]),
fori∈{1,...,N ASR}. Using these, RNNT loss for an example
sequencey= [hello,there,hi]is obtained from Equation 3.
Next, the ASR transducer is frozen and the SD transducer
is trained using blank-shared RNNT loss (BS-RNNT) with the
vocabularyV SD∪{ϕ}, whereV SD ={s 1,...,s NSD}andϕis
borrowed from ASR. The SD encoder takes features from an
intermediate (5th) layer of the ASR encoder as input. Since
SD predictor, a 1-D convolutional layer with a kernel size of
2(CNN-2), is also borrowed from the ASR transducer,g SD
u =
gASR
u . While the blank posterior is the same as in Equation 4,
the probability of speaker labels,ˆyt,u∈V SD, are given by
P(ˆyt,u|x1:T,y 1:u−1) = (1−b t,u)·softmax(j SD
t,u).
Using these, the RNNT loss for a corresponding speaker-label
sequencey={s 1,s 1,s 2}is obtained from Equation 3.
During inference, whenever ASR emitsˆyt,u̸=ϕ, the cor-
responding speaker label is predicted by applying an argmax(·)
over the SD logitsj SD
t,u. We apply this model as it is to RD to
obtain our second baseline B2: ASR (CNN-2) + RD (CNN-2,
L5) BS-RNNT in Table 2.
3. Proposed ASR-Synchronized RD
We propose modifications to the ASR-Synchronized SD model
in terms of (1) predictor network, (2) ASR encoder’s features as
input to RD encoder, and (3) training criterion to make it suit-
able for ASR-Synchronized RD. The rationales are as follows.
5283
(a)Word-prediction capability.
 (b)Role-prediction capability.
Figure 2:Effect of Role-ASR predictor’s context length (number
of BPE tokens) on (a) WER and (b) R-WDER when trained on
DoPaCo and evaluated on the validation set of DoPaCo.
3.1. Role Diarization Relies More on Linguistic Features
Intuitively, SD is expected to rely primarily on speaker-specific
acoustic cues rather than linguistic context. In contrast, RD in-
volves not only differentiating between speakers, but also deter-
mining the roles they play in the interaction, which necessitates
both acoustic and semantic (i.e., what was spoken) information.
The relative importance of these two modalities, however, is
not immediately clear for RD. In the following, through two
complementary studies, we show that RD is more strongly in-
fluenced by linguistic context than by acoustic features.
One source of linguistic context in a transducer model is the
predictor network. Using the Role-ASR model (Section 2.1),
we show that while ASR may benefit from a smaller predictor’s
context [19–21], role prediction definitely requires a longer con-
text. For this, in Figure 2, we plot the word-prediction capability
(WER) and the role-prediction capability (R-WDER defined in
Section 4) of the Role-ASR model versus the predictor’s con-
text length (number of BPE tokens). To model a finite context
length ofntokens, we use CNN-n, and for an infinite context,
we use an RNN. We observe that while WER remains mostly
unchanged (CNN-2being the best), R-WDER improves signif-
icantly as we increase the context length. This confirms that,
unlike word prediction, role prediction benefits from the long-
range linguistic information provided by the predictor. There-
fore, the proposed system P1 differs from baseline system B2
by using separate task-specific predictors: CNN-2for ASR and
RNN for RD. We label this system as P1: ASR (CNN-2) + RD
(RNN, L5) BS-RNNT in Table 2.
The second source of linguistic information is the word-
level features from the upper layers of the ASR encoder. We
show that while speaker prediction works best with features
from intermediate layers (5th layer in [2]) that encode more
speaker-level information, role prediction works best with fea-
tures from upper layers that store more word-level information.
For this, we take system P1 from above and use it with features
from different layers of the ASR encoder. In Table 1, we see that
R-WDER improves as we go from lower to higher layers for
both the DoPaCo and SiMeCo sets. Note that since the model
has been trained only on DoPaCo, R-WDER on out-of-domain
SiMeCo is comparatively much worse; however, the trend is the
same. Based on this, we modify the system P1 to instead use
the last layer (L12) features and denote it as P2: ASR (CNN-2)
+ RD (RNN, L12) BS-RNNT in Table 2.
3.2. 1-Best Alignment Path + Cross Entropy Loss
The baseline system B2 [2] employs blank-factorized HAT
transducers [19] so that the ASR transducer’s blank-emission
probability at each(t,u)step can be shared with the auxil-
iary transducer, providing soft alignment information along all
RNNT paths (Figure 1b). The auxiliary SD/RD transducer then
uses the full RNNT loss, computed over all alignment paths, to
ASR Encoder Layer DoPaCo Val SiMeCo Val
L-2 8.1 42.1
L-5 7.2 40.3
L-86.934.3
L-10 7.0 30.9
L-126.9 29.5
Table 1:R-WDER of the model ASR (CNN-2) + RD (RNN, L-n)
BS-RNNT, with RD encoder taking input from layer L-nof the
ASR encoder. The model is trained on DoPaCo and evaluated
on DoPaCo and out-of-domain SiMeCo.
train its corresponding emissions.
In this paper, we instead propose to train the RD transducer
simply using cross-entropy loss only along the 1-best alignment
path. Unlike the RNNT loss, the 1-best alignment provides a de-
terministic target sequence, simplifying the optimization land-
scape. This also eliminates the compute and memory overhead
associated with marginalizing on all alignment paths, allowing
larger batch sizes and a shorter overall training time. Moreover,
while RNNT loss must be recomputed at every epoch for all
training samples, forced alignments can be computed once and
reused every epoch, further improving efficiency.
For this, as shown in Figure 1c, the reference text is first
forced aligned with the ASR-transducer to identify the(t,u)
steps at which non-blank tokens are emitted. Then, using
the cross-entropy loss, the RD transducer is trained to emit
role tokens at its corresponding(t,u)steps. For example,
for the ASR label sequencey= [hello,there,hi], leta ∗ =
[hello,there,ϕ,ϕ,hi,ϕ]∈ A(y)be the 1-best forced-aligned
path, anda∗
r = [DOC,DOC,−,−,PAT,−]be the correspond-
ing role label path (Figure 1c), where−indicates no train-
ing on blank emissions. Then, with the vocabularyV RD =
{r1,...,r NRD}, the role probabilities, for r t,u∈V RD, and the
cross-entropy-based RD loss are given, respectively, by
P(r t,u|x1:T,y 1:u−1) =softmax(j RD
t,u),
LRD =
X
rt,u∈a∗r , r t,u̸=−
−lnP(r t,u|x1:T,y 1:u−1).
During inference, similar to [2], at(t,u)steps where ASR
emit non-blank tokens, we apply argmax(·)on the RD logits
jRD
tspeaker,u to predict the corresponding speaker role. This is
our final proposed model denoted by P3: ASR (CNN-2) + RD
(RNN, L12) 1Best-CE in Table 2.
4. Experiments
Dataset.We use an internal dataset of real-world doctor-patient
conversations (DoPaCo) and a public dataset of simulated medi-
cal conversations (SiMeCo) [22]. DoPaCo consists of conversa-
tions recorded with microphones placed at medium-to-far-field
positions within medical exam rooms, covering a wide range
of medical specialties. These are manually transcribed and
anonymized, where speakers in a conversation are labeled ac-
cording to their functional role: doctor, patient, other1, other2,
etc. The dataset is divided into training (1750h), validation
(26.5h), and test (35.0h) sets. SiMeCo consists of simulated
near-field conversations between only two roles: doctor and pa-
tient. Of the total 272 recordings, we remove 9 that appear to
be telephony. The remaining 263 conversations are from the
specialties of respiratory (207), musculoskeletal (46), cardiol-
ogy (5) and gastroenterology (5). Each specialty is split in a
60:20:20 ratio to form training (21.3h), validation (6.75h), and
evaluation (8.5h) sets. On all recordings, we apply a TDNN-
LSTM-based voice activity detector to split them into segments
of length typically less than 18 sec. For text tokenization, we
use SentencePiece [23] with a vocabulary of size 5000.
5284
Table 2:WER and R-WDER of different baseline and proposed models trained on DoPaCo and evaluated on DoPaCo and out-of-domain
SiMeCo. The column with “finetuned” refers to DoPaCo-trained models further finetuned on SiMeCo and evaluated on SiMeCo. The
type of the predictor and the ASR encoder layer from which RD encoder takes features as input are shown in parentheses. The best
results are shown in bold. Since systems B2, P1, P2, and P3 share the same frozen ASR module, the WER is reported only once.
DoPaCo Eval SiMeCo Eval SiMeCo Eval (finetuned)
Model Model Size WER R-WDER WER R-WDER WER R-WDER
Baseline
B1:Role-ASR (RNN) [1] 104M 16.03 6.5 10.62 34.28.82.2
ASR (CNN-2) + 62.4M +15.67-10.56-8.8-
B2:RD (CNN-2, L5) BS-RNNT Loss [2] 41.6M=104M ” 7.8 ” 44.3 ” 5.5
Ours
P1:RD (RNN, L5) BS-RNNT Loss 42.6M=105M ” 7.1 ” 41.3 ” 5.0
P2:RD (RNN, L12) BS-RNNT Loss 42.6M=105M ” 6.3 ” 28.9 ” 2.5
P3:RD (RNN, L12) 1Best-CE Loss 42.6M=105M ”6.1”27.2”2.1
Model Architecture.The ASR encoder contains two con-
volutional subsampling layers that reduce the frame rate by a
factor of 4, followed by 12 e-branchformer layers [24], each
with a dimensionality of 384, 6-headed self-attention, and feed-
forward projection sublayers with 1536 dimensions. The RD
encoder is similar to ASR encoder but with 9 e-branchformer
layers and convolutional layers replaced by linear layers to pre-
serve the frame rate. The RNN predictor is a single-layer LSTM
with 384 dimensions, and the CNN-2predictor is a 1-D con-
volutional layer with a kernel size of 2. Role-ASR transducer
is made up of a 21-layer e-branchformer encoder and a 2-layer
RNN predictor to match the size of the dual-transducer systems.
The joint network of all transducers has 512 hidden units.
Training.We use the ESPnet framework [25] for training
the models. We use audio segments of up to 20 seconds pro-
cessed into 64-dimensional log-Mel features (25 ms window
and 10 ms frame shift) and apply speed perturbation [26] and
SpecAugment [27]. We train the Role-ASR and ASR trans-
ducers on DoPaCo for 40 epochs using Adam with an initial
learning rate of2×10 −3,15k warm-up steps, and a weight
decay of10 −6. On SiMeCo, because of its smaller size, we
initialize the Role-ASR and ASR transducers with their cor-
responding DoPaCo-trained weights and then fine-tune for 30
epochs with an initial learning rate of10−4,10k warm-up steps,
and a weight decay of10 −6. We average the ten best models
based on the validation loss to get the final model. We train
the RD transducer from scratch for 30 epochs, for both DoPaCo
and SiMeCo, with an initial learning rate of10−4,1k warm-up
steps, and a weight decay of10 −6. We average the ten best
models based on the validation R-WDER to get the final model.
Inference and Scoring.For ASR and Role-ASR inference,
we use beam search [18] of size 20. For RD inference, we use
the argmax method in Section 3. For scoring, we useasclite
from the NIST Scoring Toolkit (SCTK) [28] for multi-speaker
alignments. ASR performance is measured using WER and role
diarization performance is measured using role-based WDER
(R-WDER). R-WDER is computed same as WDER [1], but hy-
pothesized words from doctor are only scored as correct against
reference doctor words; the same for the patient. Other-role
words can match words from any single other reference speaker.
4.1. Results
In Table 2, we first report the performance of the baseline mod-
els B1 (Section 2.1) and B2 (Section 2.2). When they are trained
on DoPaCo and evaluated on in-domain DoPaCo, we see that
ASR (CNN-2) achieves the better WER (15.67vs.16.03) while
Role-ASR (RNN) achieves the better R-WDER (6.5vs.7.8).
When evaluated on out-of-domain SiMeCo, we see the effect
of domain mismatch with both models performing poorly, es-
pecially in terms of R-WDER (34.2and44.3). When these
DoPaCo-trained models are finetuned on SiMeCo, we see the
expected gains, with both achieving the same WER (8.8) and
Role-ASR outperforming in terms of R-WDER (2.2vs.5.5).
The reason for the poor R-WDER performance of base-
line B2, as discussed in Section 3.1, is the lack of injection
of the necessary linguistic information into the RD transducer.
Thus, applying the proposed modifications of (1) task-specific
RNN predictor and (2) use of ASR encoder’s 12th-layer fea-
tures, we get systems P1 and P2, respectively, that achieve sig-
nificant R-WDER improvements across all settings (7.8→6.3,
44.3→28.9,5.5→2.5). Finally, applying the 1-best path +
cross-entropy loss, proposed in Section 3.2, we get our final
system P3 that achieves the best R-WDER in all cases.
Overall, the results show that our proposed ASR+RD
model, with separate task-specific predictors and trained using
cross-entropy loss along the 1-best ASR path, outperforms other
models in terms of both WER and R-WDER. Note that con-
sidering only the SiMeCo results, one might conclude that our
method provides only modest improvements over Role-ASR;
however, it is important to clarify that SiMeCo does not reflect
real-world challenges, as it consists of clean, near-field, arti-
ficially simulated two-role conversations that are highly struc-
tured and free from overlaps, interruptions, or rapid turn-taking.
Experiments on SiMeCo are included primarily to demonstrate
the generalization of our contributions across multiple datasets.
In contrast, DoPaCo comprises real-world medical exam room
recordings captured in medium-to-far-field conditions, some-
times involving more than two roles (e.g., doctor, patient, fam-
ily members, interpreters, and other clinicians) and containing
unstructured, overlapping, and interruption-heavy interactions.
While Role-ASR already performs quite well on the clean and
simulated SiMeCo dataset, its performance degrades in more
challenging real-world scenarios such as DoPaCo, where our
proposed method delivers improvements in both ASR and role
diarization. Therefore, the DoPaCo results are more indicative
of practical impact, whereas the SiMeCo results are primarily
for establishing the generalization of our approach.
5. Conclusion
This work demonstrated that a modified version of the auxiliary
speaker diarization network [2] can be successfully adapted for
speaker-role diarization, achieving superior performance over
the integrated approach in [1]. The study also established that,
unlike speaker prediction, role prediction depends more on lin-
guistic context than on acoustic cues, motivating two modifica-
tions: (1) separate task-specific predictors: CNN for ASR and
RNN for role prediction, and (2) use of higher-layer ASR en-
coder features which encode richer linguist