Exploring the effect of the visual channel in vocal expression of affect 
in an Irish (Gaelic) synthetic voice 
Anna Maria Giovannini1, Zihan Wang1, Ailbhe Ní Chasaide1, Christer Gobl1 
1 School of Linguistic, Speech and Communication Sciences, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland 
giovanna@tcd.ie, zwang7@tcd.ie, anichsid@tcd.ie, cegobl@tcd.ie 
 
Abstract 
This paper explores the effects of the visual context on the per-
ception of emotion in synthesised speech. Vocal stimuli target-
ing the affects angry, happy, sad, bored and relaxed were cre-
ated through voice source modifications to a synthetic utter -
ance. These were combined with facial expressions  targeting 
the same affects with the addition of interested. A perception 
test was conducted with the following combinations: (i) voice 
only (no visual s), (ii) congruent (matching vocal and  visual 
affect) and (iii) incongruent (opposing vocal and visual affect). 
The initial hypothesis that the addition of congruent visual con-
text would enhance the perception of the target ed affect 
received little support. While this points to a dominance of the 
vocal channel, the results for the incongruent stimuli underline 
the importance of the visual channel. A second hypothesis that 
the visual information would allow for better discrimination 
among high- (or low-) activation states was largely borne out. 
Index Terms : affect, facial expressions, voice source 
transformation, emotion, speech synthesis, Irish, perception 
1. Introduction 
This paper explores how vocal expression of affect may interact 
with added visual information, by combining previously tested 
affect-coloured vocal stimuli with animated facial expressions 
of emotion. This experiment builds on previous experiments  
[1, 2], which have explored the voice source correlates of affect 
perception, by extending previous work to examine the interac-
tion of the vocal and visual modalities. 
While the literature on vocal cues to emotion and the evi-
dence that humans can correctly infer emotion based solely on 
the voice is extensive, e.g., [3-6], the importance of studying 
the facial channel alongside the vocal channel has been men -
tioned in the literature [ 7], with studies suggesting that some 
emotions are better recognized from the face, and others from 
the voice [ 8]. I t is speculated that facial expressions have 
evolved to help listeners identify mixed every-day life emotions 
when the voice is not enough [9].  
The present study thus aims to investigate the contribution 
of each channel by combining vocal and visual expressions of 
affect in both congruent stimuli (same target affect for both vis-
ual and vocal  channels) and incongruent stimuli (vocal and 
visual information targeting opposite affects). Also present in 
the experiment are voice -only stimuli, i.e., vocal stimuli 
presented inde pendently and not accompanied by any visual 
stimulus. 
The congruent combinations follow the logic that adding 
visual cues to a vocal stimulus naturally strengthens the cueing 
of its target ed affect, a concept that is well documented in the 
literature, e.g., [10-13]. The voice -only stimuli were also 
included in the experiment for a direct comparison, as the 
experiment also aims to investigate whether a particular infor -
mation channel is more effective in uniquely cueing particular 
emotions than the other, e.g. , [8, 9], especially for emotions 
poorly differentiated from the voice alone.  
Likewise, the inclusion of incongruent combinations also 
investigates channel dominance when these channels present 
conflicting information, as seen in, e.g., [14, 15]. Channel dom-
inance investigations have produced mixed results in the past 
[15, 16], with biases towards the visual or vocal channels 
depending on culture [17, 18] or even age [12], which motivates 
this investigation as being specifically limited to the context of 
adult speakers of Irish.  
It is hypothesised that the perception of affect in the voice 
will be influenced by the visual context, with congruent combi-
nations strengthening the targeted affective cueing and incon -
gruent combinations counteracting the targeted affect as well as 
potentially causing a switch in channel dominance. 
The present study was  further prompted by questions aris-
ing from earlier research, which has demonstrated that a range 
of emotions and moods can be evoked by altering voice source 
features of an utterance. It was repeatedly found that for a given 
voice quality, the signalling of affect was not unique [1 9-24] 
i.e., specific voice qualities were associated with more than a 
single affective state with overlaps among high- (or low-) acti-
vation states. It is hypothesised that the addition of visual infor-
mation to the vocal stimulus will yield more unique signalling 
of affect, and better differentiation among high - (or low-) acti-
vation states. 
The vocal stimuli for this experiment were created through 
voice source transformations to a neutral utterance produced by 
an Irish (Gaelic) TTS voice. These transformations were based 
on voice source analysis of natural utterances produced to por -
tray the affects angry, happy, sad, bored and relaxed, and on 
perception tests based on the resynthesis of a neutral utterance, 
modified to incorporate salient voice source features  [2]. The 
visual stimuli were created as digital animations  using a pre -
rigged 3D male avatar, manually lip-synched to the vocal stim-
uli and targeting the same affects, with the addition of an inter-
ested facial expression as an incongruent combination to bored. 
While the primary focus here is on the interplay of voice 
source and visual correlates of affect, it is being carried out with 
a view to potential practical  applications. The Irish TTS sys-
tems are being deployed in an AAC communication system for 
non-verbal users [25]: the present experiments allow explora-
tion of how affect-related voice shifts and potentially facial 
expressions might be incorporated to extend their communica-
tive capabilities. 
4122
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1363
2. Methodology 
The affective vocal stimuli were generated by modifying a neu-
tral sentence in order to render the above -mentioned affective 
states. The following sentence was produced with a male Irish 
TTS voice: 
‘Geobhaimid bád ar an lá sin’  
‘Get (future tense) we boat on the day that’ (morpheme gloss) 
‘We will take the boat on that day’ (translation) 
Affect-targeting versions of the synthetic utterance were 
created from the neutral utterance by modifying voice source 
(and in one case, filter) parameters. These modifications were 
done using the Voice Source Generator (VSG) [26, 27], a sys-
tem developed for generating voice source signals. Based on 
voice source data for the neutral utterance and a specification 
of the required parameter modifications , the VSG generates a 
modified source signal, using the aliasing -free version [28] of 
the Liljencrants-Fant (LF) glottal flow model [29].  
The specific mod ifications were based on a  prior analysis 
of affect portrayals, recorded by the same speaker as was used 
to build the TTS voice used here (male voice, Kerry dialect , 
available at www.abair.ie [30]). These analyses involved man-
ual interactive inverse filtering [ 31, 32 ] and LF model para-
metrisation of the voice source signal.  
Three source parameters were controlled for the affect-tar-
geting stimuli: f0, Ee (the excitation strength, which relates to 
the overall intensity of the source signal ), and Rd, a global 
waveshape parameter proposed by Fant [ 33], which is defined 
as 0.11‒1 f0 Up / Ee, where Up is the peak airflow of the glottal 
pulse. It has been s hown that Rd is strongly correlated to the 
degree of vocal tension. For further details, see [2]. 
In addition to the voice source changes, the sad and happy 
stimuli included tempo shifts (a 10% increase in duration for 
sad and a 10% decrease for happy). The happy stimuli also 
included a 4% increase in all formant frequencies. These mod-
ifications used the PSOLA algorithm [34] in PRAAT [35].  
The vocal stimuli in this study  applied a combination of  
both global (across the entire utterance) and local (localized to 
the accented syllables) changes to the voice source  in order to 
create the affective stimuli  as described in [ 2], given their 
higher target affect recognition ratings reported.  
 The visual stimuli were created using a pre-rigged realistic 
3D male model from the Genesis 9.0 package in the open-
source animation software Daz 3D [36]. This model allows for 
manipulation of facial movements , enabling feature modifica -
tion in a continuous and systematic manner.  The theoretical 
background for the creation of the facial expressions was the 
Facial Action Coding System [37], which quantifies shifts in 
facial muscle movement. References for facial shifts associated 
with specific affective states w ere also acquired from [ 38-40]. 
The default state of the 3D model was deemed as the ‘neutral’ 
as it matched descriptions of facial neutrality described in [37]. 
Once the affect -related changes to the facial expressions were 
applied, these were lip-synched to the utterances.   
Lastly, Adobe Photoshop [41] was used to combine the vis-
ual and vocal stimuli. This allowed for the animation frame rate 
to be freely manipulated , so that the lip-synch could be easily 
matched to the utterances with altered tempo, allowing any 
combination of vocal and visual stimuli desirable for this and 
future experiments. As mentioned, t he interested visual affect 
was created as a counterpart to the bored affect.   
2.1. Visual Stimuli Validation Test 
It was deemed important that the facial expressions used in this 
experiment would be relatively subtle, so as not to overpower 
the vocal stimuli. Note that the vocal stimuli were a lso created 
to avoid extreme expressions of emotion. 
To ascertain the most appropriate visual settings,  an initial 
validation experiment was conducted . Three versions of each 
visual affect were created, with different degrees of intensity 
(measured according to the Action Units in [ 37]), along with 
one version of neutral . The total 19 visual stimuli  (with no 
audio) were presented to 20 subjects in three sets of repetitions, 
in the form of a multiple-choice test. The choices included all 
affects created, plus a n ‘other’ category where listeners could 
freely write down the affect they perceived. 
This validation test had a two-fold objective: (1) to evaluate 
if the stimuli truly invoked the target affects when presented in 
isolation, and (2) to determine which of the three versions of 
each affect were the most subtle, while still standing above a 
predetermined recognition threshold based on previous studies 
[8, 40, 42].  
The results can be summarized as follows. With the excep-
tion of relaxed and interested, the visual affects achieved high 
target recognition rates,. Only a couple of listeners chose the 
‘other’ option for a small number of affects. A threshold of 70% 
target recognition rate was established for the affects angry, 
bored, happy and sad, meaning that the most subtle version of 
the facial expression was used as long as its target recognition 
rating was above this percentage . For interested and relaxed, 
the most effective versions were used, which only achieved tar-
get recognition rates above a 45% threshold (note that lower 
identification rates are reported in the literature for these affects 
[40, 42]). Based on results from this validation test, the visual 
stimuli were chosen and combined with the vocal stimuli as pre-
viously described.  
 
 
Figure 1: Sample frame of the neutral (left) and happy 
(right) facial expressions on the 3D model (‘Ty’ from the 
Daz 3D Genesis 9.0 Package). 
2.2. Perception Test Design 
A total of 17 stimuli were created, consisting of the three 
stimulus types ( voice-only, congruent and incongruent) for 
each of the five targeted vocal affects (angry, happy, bored, sad, 
relaxed) plus the neutral baseline, included as both a voice-only 
stimulus and as a congruent combination with the neutral face. 
4123
 
Figure 2: (a) Binary identification rate of affect perception for each triad of stimuli; (b) Intensity mean and confidence 
interval for each stimulus type in each test. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals (2 standard errors) around mean.
 
The perception experiment involved three tests,  each 
including all 17 pairs of utterances. The neutral stimulus was 
presented first (in voice-only form if a voice-only stimulus fol-
lowed, or in congruent voice + visual form if a stimulus com -
bining the two channels followed), followed by one of th e 
remaining 15 stimuli in random order. 
In each of the three tests, l isteners judged the affect of the 
second stimulus on a 7-point scale (−3 to +3), choosing between 
two opposite affects: (1) Happy vs. Sad, (2) Interested vs. 
Bored, (3) Angry vs. Relaxed. Listeners chose which of the two 
affects were perceived (if any). T he extremes of the scale, 3 
represented a strong expression of the affect, 2 represented a 
moderate expression, and 1 represented a slight degree of per-
ceived affect. Listeners were asked to choose t he midpoint, 0, 
whenever no affect ( neutral) was perceived, or when the per-
ceived affect was not available as an option in that particular 
test.  
The addition of an interested option was to allow a threefold 
pairing of opposite affects, i.e., as a counterpart to bored in the 
Interested-Bored test. Its inclusion was also motivated by the 
fact that in earlier experiments, e.g., [20], high-activation stim-
uli were often perceived as interested. 
The perception experiment was carried out with 31 partici-
pants with varying levels of proficiency in Irish. Instructions 
were presented prior to the experiment, along with a primer of 
the neutral stimulus, followed by a randomised sequence of the 
affect-targeting voice-only stimuli. Practice runs were also 
included before each of the three tests.  
3. Results and Discussion 
The results are presented in Figure  2. The left panel 
(Fig. 2a) shows the binary perception classification rate for 
each affect achieved for each triad of affect -targeting stimuli 
(voice-only = black, congruent = blue, incongruent = red). The 
neutral voice -only stimulus is the dotted black line  (which 
yielded virtually identical responses to the congruent neutral 
combination). The box and larger data points in the left panel 
(Fig. 2a) draw attention to the affect targeted by a specific triad 
of stimuli. The right panel  (Fig. 2b) presents, for each of the 
three tests , the mean and  confidence intervals of perceived 
intensity score for each stimulus type. Here too, a box draws 
attention to the stimuli which were targeting the specific affects 
relevant to each test. 
The analysis was done using mixed-effects ordinal logistic 
regression models in R [43] to examine how target affects and 
stimulus types influenced  intensity scores . A separate model 
was fitted for each test (Happy-Sad, Interested-Bored, and 
Angry-Relaxed), treated as ordinal dependent variables. Target 
affect and stimulus type were set as the independent variables, 
with the neutral affect and the voice-only stimulus type used as 
the reference categories respectively. The models also tested the 
interactions between these variables. 
Overall, identification rates for the targeted stimuli were 
very high for both congruent and voice-only stimulus types. In 
virtually every case, an affect-targeting stimulus (whether con-
gruent or voice -only) achieved the highest identification rates 
(Fig. 2a) or strength of perceived affect (Fig. 2b) for a particular 
4124
affect. The one exception was the relaxed affect, which was 
more strongly cued by the bored-targeting stimuli. The high 
identification rates ( Fig. 2a) and intensity scores ( Fig. 2b) 
obtained for happy are of particular interest, as this affect has 
tended to be very elusive in many previous studies, which have 
explored the perception of production-based acoustic correlates 
of affect [44-47]. Results are further discussed in terms of our 
two main hypotheses. 
Hypothesis 1: Congruent visuals enhance affect perception. 
This hypothesis was not strongly supported. While there was 
some general tendency for stronger intensity scores ( Fig. 2b), 
none of these changes reached statistical significance and a 
counter-effect was found for angry in all three tests. Similarly, 
identification rates (Fig. 2a) were rather similar for the congru-
ent and voice -only stimuli. The conclusion therefore is that 
matching visual and vocal stimuli combinations did not sys -
tematically alter ratings in relation to the voice-only stimuli.  
This is a surprise finding in view  of the results reported in 
the literature [14, 15, 48] and suggest that in this exper iment, 
the vocal channel is the dominant one. Nonetheless, the 
incongruent stimuli highlight the importance of the visual chan-
nel. When looking at interaction effects (with confidence inter-
val scores shown in Fig . 2b), the incongruent happy showed a 
strong negative effect in the Happy -Sad (β = −4.13, p < .001) 
and Interested -Bored ( β = −3.31, p < .001) tests , effectively 
reducing the strong positive effect of the voice -only and con -
gruent variations by adding the sad visuals (also reflected in 
Fig. 2a, with binary identification rates falling from 94% for the 
congruent and voice-only happy to 58% for the incongruent in 
the Happy-Sad test). Overall, the incongruent stimuli tend to 
result in a relative shift towards neutral affect.  However, the 
visuals never result in a shift in polarity (e.g., from happy to sad 
or vice versa) which again points to the vocal cues being the 
dominant channel in this experiment. 
There may be different factors at play that could explain 
why the addition of visual cues fail to significantly enhance 
affect identification ratings/strength scores. Firstly, there could 
be a saturation effect: in the case of happy and angry, the vocal 
stimuli alone are achieving high identification rates as well as 
rather high perceived intensity levels. It might simply be that 
there is little room for the added visual information to contrib-
ute more. It may also be the case that in opting for not -very-
extreme versions of the facial expressions  in this experiment , 
the potential for visual enhancement was lessened. There is 
likely to be critical thresholds for the two modalities , beyond 
which additional information may not be effective. It seems 
likely that w here either vocal or visual information is poten -
tially ambiguous, dual modality signalling would have a major 
effect; where one modality is strongly represented, the potential 
contribution of the other modality is likely to be substantially 
reduced.  
Hypothesis 2: Congruent visual context differentiates 
among high- and low-activation affects. This hypothesis does 
appear to be supported by the present results. At the high-acti-
vation end, the differentiation of happy and angry is signifi-
cantly greater for the congruent than the voice -only stimuli in 
the Happy-Sad test (p = .038). Note also in Fig. 2b that the con-
gruent angry stimulus has a mean close to 0 for the happy affect 
(Happy-Sad test). Likewise, the congruent happy stimulus 
yields a mean close to 0 for the angry affect (Angry-Relaxed 
test). On the other hand, neither happy nor angry are well dif-
ferentiated from interested. This, however, may not be very sur-
prising: one can assume that both happy and angry affects 
inherently entail a level of interest in the subject at hand.  
For the low-activation affects, the congruent sad and bored 
stimuli are significantly better differentiated for the congruent 
than for the voice-only stimuli for the Happy-Sad test (p =.006), 
and this greater differentiation can also be seen from the identi-
fication rates ( Fig. 2a). Similarly, in the Interested -Bored test, 
significantly better differentiation of these two affects is found 
for the congruent than for the voice -only stimuli ( p = .023). 
Only in the case of relaxed in the Angry-Relaxed test is the con-
gruent stimulus little differentiated from bored and sad. 
4. Conclusions 
This experiment showed very high target affect identifica tion 
rates for both voice-only and congruent stimuli. Of partic ular 
interest is the consistently high identification and st rength rat-
ings for the happy affect, which has tended in many past studies 
to be elusive.  
The initial hypothesis, i.e., that the addition of visual infor-
mation to the vocal channel would enhance the perception of 
the affects was not supported. Although there was a trend 
towards enhancement, it was not consistent and did not reach 
statistical significance. This finding is surprising, given that the 
importance of the visual modality has been emphasised in many 
past studies. Nonetheless, the fact that incongruent visuals fre -
quently resulted in a striking attenuation of the strength of the 
perceived affect points to the importance of the visual channel.  
The high ratings achieved for the voice -only stimuli may 
partially explain why the added visual information did not yield 
major enhancement of affect perception in this experiment. A 
saturation effect may be at play here. A further factor, as men-
tioned, is likely to be the fact that the choice of more subtle 
visual expressions may have reduced their potential impact.  
Therefore, the dominance of one or other channel may depend 
on critical thresholds for either one: if the vocal/visual infor -
mation is ambigu ous, the addition of the other modality may 
play a more critical role. 
As hypothesised, the addition of visual context to the vocal 
cues did yield better levels of differentiation among specific 
high- or low-activation affects. In real life face-to-face commu-
nication, the voice may encode a major part of the affect, while 
the visual adds refinement and more unique identification. 
Future experiments will hopefully elucidate these matters 
further. For example, experiments where the strength of the vis-
ual cueing is systematically varied may allow more insight into 
how the modalities interact.  
5. Acknowledgements 
This research was funded by the Irish Research Council under 
award number GOIPG/2021/56 to the first author, and through 
the Róbóglór-ABAIR project, awarded by the Department of 
Rural and Community Development and the Gaeltacht, with 
funding from the National Library, as part of the Stratéis 20 
Bliain don Ghaeilge. 
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure 
The authors h ereby declare that no Generative Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) was used throughout the course of the present 
research or in the preparation of this work.