Bridging the Speech AI Accessibility Gap for Deaf and Hard of Hearing People
Abraham Glasser ID 1,∗∗, Christian Vogler ID 1, Raja Kushalnagar ID 1
School of Science, Technology, Accessibility, Mathematics and Public Health, Gallaudet University
{abraham.glasser,christian.vogler,raja.kushalnagar}@gallaudet.edu
Abstract
In this position paper, we, a team of Deaf signers who can
and do use our voices, discuss how speech Artificial Intelli-
gence (AI) services fail to account for the unique use and needs
by Deaf and Hard of Hearing (DHH). DHH individuals often
speak with ”deaf accents” shaped by hearing loss and ethnicity.
Current speech AI struggles with these nuances, creating barri-
ers and failing to capture the rich meaning of speech compared
to text. Through our lived experiences, we highlight essential
design frameworks for future AI: UVG (Usability, Verifiabil-
ity, Graceful Degradation) and FATE (Fairness, Accountability,
Transparency, Ethics). We explore non-auditory verification,
preserving DHH identity through personalized voices, and ad-
dress the privacy, data, and community marginalization risks
of developing AI without DHH input. By centering DHH per-
spectives, we advocate for inclusive, context-aware technolo-
gies that promote equitable communication in workplaces, so-
cial spaces, and beyond.
Index Terms: Deaf, DHH, speech AI accessibility, speech to
text, text to speech, speech to speech
1. Introduction
We, the authors of this paper, are all Deaf signers who can use
our voices. Some of us use them on a regular basis while others
do not. We all also have accents that derive from both ethnicity
and deafness, which create barriers in interpersonal communi-
cation, as well as using artificial intelligence (AI) technologies
such as speech to text (STT); that is, automatic speech recogni-
tion (ASR). All of us experience these barriers in our daily lived
experiences.
In this position paper, we explain the challenges that Deaf
and Hard of Hearing (DHH) users face with speech AI, due to
the unique characteristics of their disability. We further discuss
potential solutions and roadblocks in the way of implementing
these solutions.
Prelingually deaf people in particular, frequently exhibit ac-
cents or atypical speech due to their hearing loss [1, 2, 3], which
also interferes with commonplace communication technologies,
such as ASR [4, 5, 6]. However, ASR is not the only speech AI-
related technology that DHH people struggle with. There are
also challenges with applying the converse — AI-based text-
to-speech (TTS) and speech-to-speech (STS) technologies, be-
cause many DHH people are unable to either hear the output
generated by such technologies altogether, or not sufficiently
well enough [7] to determine whether the output is appropriate
and reflects the intent of the user.
**indicates the corresponding author.
Lastly, it is not just technology that is impacted, but also
common face-to-face interactions. Many hearing people, es-
pecially those who are not familiar with deaf accents, struggle
with understanding these accents or have to expend consider-
able mental effort to do so [2]. Speech AI technologies could
assist with human and computer interactions, if only DHH peo-
ple could have total confidence in their output.
Overall, we advocate for the following principles that
should underpin speech AI technologies:
•Usable:DHH people must be able to use speech AI tech-
nologies as confidently and easily as hearing people.
•Verifiability:DHH people must be able to verify that the
output generated by speech AI is correct and not require the
ability to hear or speak.
•Graceful Degradation:Technology must not fail catas-
trophically when it encounters a DHH-related situation that
is beyond the scope of its training.
•FATE:Development of speech AI technologies must follow
Fairness, Accountability, Transparency and Ethics (FATE)
principles.
1.1. Differences between Speech and Text Representation
The majority of speech AI technologies and use cases, specifi-
cally STT and TTS, revolve about conversions and translations
between speech and text. However, it is critical to acknowledge
that these two modalities are not equivalent. Using text, either
as a target modality for STT and TTS, or as an intermediate
modality for STS (i.e., speech-to-text-to-speech), will run into
significant limitations.
Speech, as a communication modality, carries more infor-
mation than text, which is an information modality. As a com-
munication modality, speech (like signed languages) conveys
paralinguistic and prosodic content in addition to the linguistic
content (the text). These paralinguistic and prosodic cues shape
how those words are interpreted. These cues, such as pitch,
stress, rhythm, tempo, and timbre can alter meaning and reveal
additional context or emotion. Communication, whether speech
or sign, carries more information, but is also fleeting, while text,
on the other hand, is precise and enduring.
In the following we describe STT, TTS and STS as three
main use cases from a DHH perspective, followed by a dis-
cussion of risks and ethical considerations applicable to DHH
speech AI development.
2. Speech to Text
Speech-to-text, also known as Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) software is typically trained with speech samples from
hearing people, which results in biased ASR engines that do
4832
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3001
not do well with Deaf speech. Even when used within limited
domains with few possibilities, such as recognizing single dig-
its 0–9, ASR for deaf speakers with poor speech intelligibility
yielded a 13% Word Error Rate (WER) [8], compared to nearly
no errors for hearing speech [9].
Prior studies have shown that commercial ASR systems un-
derperform for DHH individuals. Glasser et al. showed that hu-
man indicators do not reliably predict the performance of ASR
engines with DHH speech. For example, even when naive hu-
man listeners rate speech as being clear and understandable,
there is high variability in ASR word error rates [10, 6]. A re-
cent study from Zhao et al. showed that this is still the case
[11].
Mixed meetings without ASL interpreter support are one
of the difficult challenges when there are more than one deaf
person present and ASR is not working well [12]. When we
have group meetings where there is only one Deaf person (e.g.,
one of us) and one or more hearing people, we have used ASR to
understand what the hearing participants are speaking, and we
are able to use our own voices to speak back to them directly.
Whether or not this is a preferred solution, this is a possible
workaround for spontaneous or unexpected situations.
However, when there are multiple Deaf people involved in
a mixed meeting with Deaf and Hearing members, if one Deaf
person is using their voice, a communication barrier manifests
between the Deaf people — one Deaf person will not be able to
understand when another Deaf person is speaking, and the ASR
output has too many errors to be understandable.
The main principles that apply to STT technologies areus-
abilityandgraceful degradation. In order for STT technolo-
gies to be usable, STT should work with Deaf speech consis-
tently and reliably without high and widely varying levels of
error rates. In the case that STT is unable to recognize a Deaf
user’s speech, graceful degradation is required in order to stop
the ASR technology from hallucinating and inserting content
that was not spoken by the Deaf person. Hallucinations pre-
viously have been shown to be a problem for speech disabili-
ties [13] and even more generally [14]. Instead of doing this
and causing much confusion, misunderstandings, and conversa-
tion breakdowns, the technology could, for example, stop and
inform the user that it was not able to understand and cannot
continue.
It also is important to recognize a fundamental limitation
of STT systems in an accessibility context. Standard punctua-
tion and formatting are limited tools for expressing intonation,
emphasis, and timing. When people read text, they must inter-
pret the emotional tone in their head, which can lead to mis-
understandings in the absence of more explicit cues. Although
people try to approximate speech nuances through punctuation
(e.g., ellipses, italics, exclamation points) and other markers
(e.g., emoticons, emojis), these are still less precise or varied
than actual vocal delivery. In any case, these are still largely
absent from contemporary STT technologies, and research to
recognize these is still limited [15].
3. Text to Speech
In today’s modern digital communications and media environ-
ment, the lack of options to provide an intelligible voice is
harming DHH individuals. For example, content creators face
significantly lower engagement on social media if their videos
lack voiceover [16, 17]. Another example is that more and more
conferences now require a presentation video in addition to or
instead of in-person presentations. All-DHH teams, including
this paper’s authors, have struggled with providing voiceovers
and narrated audio descriptions to accompany their signing in
the video. Having access to voicing also plays a critical role in
interpersonal communications, no matter whether face to face,
online, or on the phone as evidenced by text-to-speech (TTS)
services [18, 19, 20]. Without access to intelligible voicing,
DHH people also find it difficult to manage various linguistic
elements, such as intonation, stress, rhythm, and pitch, which
are important in daily interactions [21, 22].
In principle, TTS offers a clear solution to the challenges
that DHH face with voicing content [17, 23], including con-
veyance of emotions and prosodic information [24, 25]. TTS
technology also offers intersectional disability benefits [26, 27]
by making the emotional undertones in textual messages more
accessible and relatable [28, 29].
However, all the growth in AI-based TTS is not addressing
the unique needs of the DHH population. There are two major
stumbling blocks: First, there is a problem withverifiability:
DHH users may not be able to evaluate effectively whether the
generated speech is appropriate in delivery, emotion, and other
prosodic information, due to insufficient usable hearing. Either
they cannot hear it at all, or they may not have access to the
acoustic features that convey it, especially with cochlear im-
plants [7], which lack the spectral resolution for nuanced emo-
tion detection in voices. Second, there areFATEchallenges.
Using random AI-generated voices loses the unique character-
istics of the DHH speaker. It is important to offer DHH users
the option to generate AI voices that sound like themselves, but
with the atypical speech characteristics modified, such that they
are more easily intelligible. In short, there is currently no way
for DHH users to have confidence in whether AI-generated TTS
is appropriate for the context and reflects their personality and
intent.
There is a need for user interfaces that address bothusabil-
ityandverifiabilityin one: DHH people should be able to cus-
tomize TTS voices and manner of expression to their liking and
have the ability to verify that the output is what it is supposed
to be. They further should be able to employ text-to-speech
models that reflect their own unique personalities, not dissimi-
lar to how mainstream providers like Eleven Labs and Lovo.ai
support voice cloning. At the same time, DHH people, as a
disabled population, are also uniquely vulnerable to exploita-
tion, and the assoiciated risks with these technologies must be
carefully assessed and managed; see also Section 5. One con-
temporary project that is addressing TTS for DHH people is the
Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center on Technology for
the Deaf and Hard of Hearing [30].
4. Speech to Speech
STT is focused on making speech accessible as a text rendering,
however impoverished compared to the information carried by
speech; likewise, TTS is focused on the areas of content cre-
ation, and typing back in two-way conversations. Beyond these,
there is also a need to support live interactive scenarios via STS,
where spoken languages are the predominant mode of commu-
nication. Such scenarios cover two primary use cases:
The first use case arises where a DHH person speaks with
an accent that renders their voice unintelligible or difficult-to-
understand, and needs a real-time service to recast their speech
clearly. Both oral [31] and sign language interpreters frequently
engage in this type of interaction, where they, due to their train-
ing and experience, are able to understand the DHH person, and
then revoice what this person said such that an untrained hear-
4833
ing person is able to follow along easily. Automating this type
of revoicing via speech AI holds great potential for giving DHH
people more flexibility and freedom to use their own voices.
There already exist services for dubbing and speech-to-speech
translation [32], but these have not been trained to work with
deaf accents.
The second use case arises where a DHH person uses sign
language and an interpreter voices their signing in a spoken lan-
guage. Because sign language interpreter supply cannot keep
up with demand [33, 34], DHH people are often forced to put
up with whichever interpreters are available, even if they are
not matched in gender, race, or ethnic background. In other
words, a female signer could be voiced by a male interpreter, or
a Black signer could be voiced by a White interpreter unfamil-
iar with the nuances of Black American Sign Language [35] and
African American language use [36]. The intersection of both
these factors can be particularly problematic [37]. Tone and de-
livery are also a challenge and are framed as giving a “voice”
to deaf professionals [38] in interpreter-mediated communica-
tions. A potential solution to this use case is use of speech AI,
conceptually similar to that of the first use case above. How-
ever, here a key difference is that an AI-based STS technology
would not have to deal with a deaf accent. Rather, the focus
would be on giving a DHH user the freedom to customize the
target speech output to their liking.
For the first use case, the principles ofusability,verifiability
andgraceful degradationall apply in nearly equal measure. In
choosing a target voice, the DHH user must be able to manipu-
late the aspects of the voice easily and have confidence that the
result matches the intent. At the same time, this technology can-
not be allowed to fail catastrophically if for portions of the DHH
user’s speech, the speech AI technology is unable to recognize
the DHH user’s voice accurately. However, there is a saving
grace: because the DHH user initiates the speech, they can also
be given the option to monitor the output via STT technologies,
which typically works well on AI-synthesized speech.
For the second use case,verifiabilityis a much bigger prob-
lem, whilegraceful degradationis much less so. Because in
this scenario, the original speech is not initiated by a DHH per-
son, but rather an interpretation of sign language into a spoken
language, the DHH person has two hurdles to consider: (1) is
the sign language interpreter accurately voicing the signing, and
(2) is the STS component accurately revoicing the interpreter’s
voicing (which may or may not be accurate) with the appropri-
ate nuances and delivery? On the other hand, because STT and
STS technologies tend to work well for hearing people on aver-
age, there is much less risk of catastrophic failures in revoicing
a hearing interpreter’s voice, compared to the first use case.
5. Risks and Ethical Considerations
As speech AI technologies continue to develop and improve,
there are several risks and ethical considerations that need to be
addressed. Examples of scenarios with ethical issues and risks
include:
If ASR models eventually improve to a level where they
are able to understand Deaf speech well enough, they might
be pushed as an alternative accessibility solution, although it
might not be a desired solution by many DHH users. For in-
stance, many DHH users would prefer to use sign language
with interpreters, especially if they do not use their voice reg-
ularly. In addition, DHH people could experience undue pres-
sure to use their voice or generate speech via typing, in place
of sign language or text-based communication. Given the lin-
guistic and cultural identities of many DHH people, this risks
marginalizing both their language use and culturally acceptable
ways of communication. Code-switching, although common-
place among hearing bilinguals and many DHH bilinguals [39],
has fairness and political considerations associated with it, es-
pecially in mixed settings of varying signing and voicing abili-
ties [40].
There are also risks in improving ASR for hearing peo-
ple’s speech. As ASR technologies continue to be typically
trained by speech samples from hearing people, ASR engines
continue to be deployed in inappropriate scenarios and under-
perform with DHH speech, which excludes DHH users from
using them. The Speech Accessibility Project addresses this
by collecting and curating a large, consented corpus of speech
samples from DHH speakers and others with atypical speech
patterns, providing researchers and developers the training data
needed to build ASR systems that recognize this speech accu-
rately [41].
With TTS and STS technologies, if given the ability to cus-
tomize AI-generated voices, it is possible to impersonate a per-
son’s voice; essentially making ”deepfake” content. DHH peo-
ple, as an already marginalized group, are uniquely vulnerable
to risks and harms associated with speech AI. However, at the
same time it must be recognized that with the proliferation of
speech AI in general, it is imperative that we find ways to make
these technologies accessible and usable for DHH people fol-
lowing the four key principles of usability, verifiability, graceful
degradation and FATE — if we do not, DHH people are at risk
of being left out of many facets of employment, community liv-
ing, and healthcare in the future; in short, everywhere where AI
is poised to take over.
One general challenge with improving speech AI technolo-
gies with DHH speech is data: Historically, it has been very
difficult to collect usable data from DHH users. Not only are
members of this community difficult to identify and recruit, but
the nature of their deaf accents and mistakes also requires ad-
ditional work to correct. For instance, a common problem ob-
served in data collection by the authors has been the propensity
of deaf speakers to omit or misstate entire words while read-
ing aloud predetermined passages of text. Controlling for these
incidents during data collection typically requires massive addi-
tional efforts either by DHH speakers to repeat data collections,
or by annotators after the fact.
Another challenge is privacy and consent. V oice samples
are personally identifiable information (PII). As a historically
marginalized community, DHH people are not just vulnerable
to risks and harms associated with AI, as explained above, but
also to misuse of their data themselves. It is critical that DHH
users are not coerced into giving consent, and that they have the
ability to withdraw consent at multiple steps along the process.
One possible way forward is to copy the model for ethical sign
language data collection, which is even more exposed to misuse
of PII [42].
6. Conclusion
AI services for speech to text, text to speech and speech to
speech continue to have significant gaps in meeting DHH users’
needs. STT systems underperform when confronted with DHH
speech, leading to ineffective solutions and communication bar-
riers. TTS systems continue to face challenges in conveying
prosodic and emotional nuances, and DHH users often cannot
verify whether a generated voice reflects their intended message
or personality. STS services could empower DHH speakers to
4834
navigate voice-based situations more independently, but only if
these technologies handle Deaf accents accurately and allow in-
dividuals to customize output voices.
To address these challenges, technologies should work re-
liably with Deaf speech without unpredictable failure modes;
should allow DHH users to confirm that generated outputs align
with their intended tone and content; and should handle errors
transparently, rather than inserting spurious content. They must
also respect users’ autonomy, identities, and diverse linguistic
preferences, including sign language. They must also address
data scarcity, privacy concerns, and the risk of inadvertently
pressuring DHH individuals to adopt voice-based communica-
tion as a default.
Looking ahead, robust collaboration among researchers,
practitioners, and the DHH community will be crucial. Ethi-
cal approaches for responsibly collecting and using DHH voice
data — along with inclusive design strategies and careful eval-
uations of user experience, can help ensure that the next gen-
eration of STT, TTS and STS services empower rather than
marginalize DHH users. By putting their needs and practices
at the forefront, AI services can provide richer communication,
social and professional participation, and a more inclusive fu-
ture.
7. Acknowledgments
The contents of this paper were developed under a grant
from the National Institute on Disability, Independent Liv-
ing, and Rehabilitation Research (NIDILRR grant number
90REGE0027). NIDILRR is a Center within the Administra-
tion for Community Living (ACL), Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS). The contents of this paper do not nec-
essarily represent the policy of NIDILRR, ACL, HHS, and you
should not assume endorsement by the Federal Government.
Additional support has been provided by the National Science
Foundation under Award No. 2440601.
8. Generative AI Use Disclosure
No generative AI was used in the preparation of this publication.
9. References
[1] M. J. Osberger and N. S. McGarr, “Speech production character-
istics of the hearing impaired,” inSpeech and language. Elsevier,
1982, vol. 8, pp. 221–283.
[2] N. S. McGarr, “The intelligibility of deaf speech to experienced
and inexperienced listeners,”Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 451–458, 1983.
[3] C. V . Hudgins, “A comparative study of the speech coordina-
tions of deaf and normal subjects,”The Pedagogical Seminary and
Journal of Genetic Psychology, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 3–48, 1934.
[4] L. G. Gottermeier and S. K. Raja, “User evaluation of automatic
speech recognition systems for deaf-hearing interactions at school
and work,”Audiology Today, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 20–34, 2016.
[5] J. P. Bigham, R. Kushalnagar, T.-H. K. Huang, J. P. Flores, and
S. Savage, “On how deaf people might use speech to control de-
vices,” inProceedings of the 19th international ACM SIGACCESS
conference on computers and accessibility, 2017, pp. 383–384.
[6] A. T. Glasser, K. R. Kushalnagar, and R. S. Kushalnagar,
“Feasibility of using automatic speech recognition with voices
of deaf and hard-of-hearing individuals,” inProceedings of the
19th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers
and Accessibility, ser. ASSETS ’17. New York, NY , USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2017, p. 373–374.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3132525.3134819
[7] M. K. Everhardt, A. Sarampalis, M. Coler, D. Bas ¸kent, and
W. Lowie, “Meta-analysis on the identification of linguistic and
emotional prosody in cochlear implant users and vocoder simula-
tions,” pp. 1092–1102, 2020.
[8] C. Jeyalakshmi, V . Krishnamurthi, and A. Revathy, “Deaf speech
assessment using digital processing techniques,”Signal & Image
Processing: An International Journal (SIPIJ), vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
14–25, 2010.
[9] G. R. Doddington, “Phonetically sensitive discriminants for im-
proved speech recognition,