ALARM: Audio–Language Alignment for Reasoning Models
Petr Grinberg ID 1,2, Hassan Shahmohammadi2
1 EPFL, Switzerland
2 Sony Europe Ltd., Germany
petr.grinberg@epfl.ch, Hassan.Shahmohammadi@sony.com
Abstract
Large audio language models (ALMs) extend LLMs with
auditory understanding. A common approach freezes the LLM
and trains only an adapter on self-generated targets. However,
this fails for reasoning LLMs (RLMs) whose built-in chain-of-
thought traces expose the textual surrogate input, yielding un-
natural responses. We propose self-rephrasing, converting self-
generated responses into audio-understanding variants compat-
ible with RLMs while preserving distributional alignment. We
further fuse and compress multiple audio encoders for stronger
representations. For training, we construct a 6M-instance multi-
task corpus (2.5M unique prompts) spanning 19K hours of
speech, music, and sound. Our 4B-parameter ALM outper-
forms similarly sized models and surpasses most larger ALMs
on related audio-reasoning benchmarks, while preserving tex-
tual capabilities with a low training cost. Notably, we achieve
the best open-source result on the MMAU-speech and MMSU
benchmarks and rank third among all the models.
Index Terms: Audio Language Models, Reasoning, Self-
generation
1. Introduction
The demonstrated success of large language models (LLMs) in
text-based tasks [1] has motivated the integration of additional
modalities, such as vision [2] and audio [3], as a natural step
toward the development of general artificial intelligence. In
this paper, we study the integration of audio input into state-
of-the-art text-based LLMs. Such models, endowed with au-
ditory understanding capabilities, are commonly referred to as
large audio language models (LALMs), or audio language mod-
els (ALMs). Due to the scarcity of supervised audio–text data
and the high computational cost of training, ALMs are typically
built by equipping the text LLMs with an audio encoder for au-
dio feature extraction and an adapter [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. However,
fine-tuning LLMs with additional audio data is not only compu-
tationally expensive—even when using parameter-efficient fine-
tuning (PEFT) techniques [9]—but also often leads to degra-
dation of the model’s text capabilities [10, 11], a phenomenon
commonly referred to as catastrophic forgetting [12]. A practi-
cal remedy is to keep the LLM frozen during training [13, 14]
and to train only a modality adapter to bridge the modality gap.
However, when target responses are human-annotated or gen-
erated by other LLMs, there is a mismatch between the dis-
tribution of target responses and that of the frozen pretrained
LLM [5]. Semantic and structural discrepancies between the
target texts in the training data and the outputs of the frozen
pretrained LLM introduce stylistic and lexical inconsistencies.
As a result, ALM performance degrades, since the frozen LLM
is forced to generate responses that lie outside its prior distribu-
tion, leading to reduced performance when performing audio-
related tasks [5].
The self-generation of target responses [5, 13] tackle this
problem by implicitly aligning audio and text inputs. In this ap-
proach, a frozen LLM generates target responsesRconditioned
on (1) textual representationsA text of the corresponding audio
inputs, such as speech transcriptions [14] or metadata-enriched
captions [5, 13], and (2) instruction promptsPthat query the
LLM. During training,A text is replaced with the correspond-
ing audio signalsA audio, and a modality adapter, attached to the
same LLM that producedR, is trained on input–target pairs of
the form{A audio,P}→R. SinceRis generated by the model
itself, this approach avoids the output distribution shift.
Nevertheless, the standard self-generation technique does
not generalize to state-of-the-art LLMs with built-in chain-of-
thought reasoning capabilities (RLMs) [15, 16]. Specifically,
replacingA audio with the correspondingA text is insufficient for
RLMs, because their built-in reasoning process reveals the tex-
tual nature of the input, resulting in unnatural responses (see
Table 2) during inference. To tackle this issue, we propose a
self-rephrasing approach that converts generated responsesR
into textual audio-understanding variants, while still avoiding
output-distribution mismatch.
Moreover, many state-of-the-art self-generation-based
ALMs [4, 5, 13] apply voice activity detection (V AD) and au-
tomatic speech recognition (ASR) to the audio, often together
with additional audio features. However, explicitly relying on
ASR can be problematic for general audio understanding due
to its sensitivity to irrelevant speech-like signals and V AD er-
rors. For example, background audio such as a TV broadcast
or distant conversations in a park may spuriously activate the
ASR module, even when the query concerns other aspects of
the input. Similarly, V AD may not detect speech in low signal-
to-noise (SNR) ratio scenarios leading to content loss. We elim-
inate the need for ASR-derived inputs and further strengthen the
representation by integrating multiple audio encoders mostly
operating at a 50 Hz token rate, while effectively compressing
the resulting information from all encoders from 175 Hz to a
length comparable to that of a single encoder at 25 Hz or 50 Hz.
We achieve this by proposing three fusion methods based on
cross-attention and Perceiver [17].
Our work extends state-of-the-art approaches [5, 13] while
addressing their critical limitations: (1) the incompatibility of
standard self-generation with RLMs, (2) noise introduced by
ASR-based inputs, and (3) hallucinations caused by artifacts in
the constructed training data. Our main contributions are as fol-
lows:
• We collect a multi-task corpus comprising 6M instances
(2.5M unique prompts) spanning 19K hours of speech, mu-
sic, and general audio. Our prompt generation and filtering
367
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-759
pipeline promotes prompt diversity and audio–prompt align-
ment, reducing the risk of hallucinations observed in the prior
large self-generated public release, DeSTA-AQA5M [5],
which contains only 7K hours of audio and 7K unique
prompts.
• We extend the self-generated multimodal LLM paradigm to
reasoning models and develop a multi-encoder ALM. Our 4B
ALM, ALARM-E, outperforms models of similar size and
even surpasses most larger ALMs on MMSU [18], ranking
third among the other models, while preserving the back-
bone’s textual capabilities and requiring substantially lower
training cost and amount of data. Morevoer, we achieve the
best open-source result on MMAU [19]-speech benchmark
and the top-3 with closed-source systems included.
• We remove the need to run ASR on the audio input and in-
stead enhance the input representation via multiple encoders,
enabling robust understanding of both vocal and non-vocal
signals while providing a compressed token sequence.
• To facilitate further research, we open-source 1 the code, in-
cluding the data collection and generation scripts, along with
our models’ checkpoints.
2. Methodology
This section details our proposed approach, including the
dataset construction pipeline and the technical design of our
model.
2.1. Dataset Construction
LetD 0 ={(A i
audio,A i
text)}N
i=1 denote a preliminary dataset,
whereA i
audio is an audio clip andA i
text is its associated textual
description with metadata. Metadata fields can represent emo-
tion, gender, nationality, audio quality, noisiness, or any other
available information about audio (see Figure 2 for an example).
GivenD 0, our goal is to construct the following dataset
D={(A i
audio,P i,R i
text)}N
i=1,
whereP i is a prompt (instruction/question) aboutA i
audio, and
Ri
text is the corresponding textual response from an LLM with
reasoning capabilities (RLM).
ConstructingDposes two main challenges. (1) Generating
a diverse set of promptsPwhile ensuring consistency with the
corresponding metadataA text. That is, each promptP i should
be answerable fromA i
text (and thus fromA i
audio) without requir-
ing information that is absent from the metadata. For example,
asking about the noise level of the recording whenAi
text does not
mention the noise level leads to hallucinated responses. (2) The
responsesR i
text should not reveal the textual nature of the input.
In practice, we observe that the RLM often repeats parts of the
metadata in its reasoning trace (see Table 2); when such out-
puts are used for training, the resulting model learns to produce
responses that sound like they were derived from text rather
than from audio, deviating from the natural behavior expected
of audio-understanding models.
To address Challenge (1), we use a fixed, pretrained in-
struction LLM, denoted byQ(Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507-
FP8 [16]), as a prompt generator. For each sampleAi
text, we first
sample a candidate set of prompts
˜P i ={P i
j}20
j=1, P i
j∼Q

·|A i
text,I

,
1https://github.com/Blinorot/ALARM
Figure 1:Overview of the corpora collection pipeline.
Table 1:Overview of our compiled dataset (total / train / vali-
dation) in comparison with DeSTA.
Audio Type #Elements (M)#Hours (K)#Unique Prompts (M)
Speech 2.91/2.60/0.29 9.88/8.83/0.98 1.40/1.27/0.16
Sound 2.01/1.80/0.20 5.54/4.98/0.55 0.36/0.33/0.06
Music 0.59/0.53/0.06 2.45/2.21/0.24 0.16/0.14/0.03
Instruction 0.57/0.56/0.01 1.02/1.01/0.01 0.57/0.56/0.01
Total 6.08/5.49/0.56 18.89/17.03/1.78 2.49/2.3/0.26
DeSTA [5] 4.96/4.96/0.00 7.00/7.00/0.00 0.007/0.007/0
whereIdenotes the instruction rules (i.e., thesystem prompt)
provided toQ. We designIto enforce alignment between
prompts and descriptions, while promoting multilingual cover-
age and prompt diversity2. We then applyQagain to filter ˜P i to
retain only prompts that (1) are answerable given the informa-
tion inA i
text and (2) do not explicitly expose the textual nature of
the input (e.g., phrases such as “provided metadata” or “given
description”). Finally, we select asingletraining prompt by
uniform sampling from the filtered set eP i
filtered:
P i∼Unif

eP i
filtered

.
Figure 1 illustrates the construction pipeline of the dataset
D. Compared to the data construction procedure in DeSTA-
AQA5M [5], their pipeline synthetically fills in missing meta-
data (e.g., speech transcriptions for V oxCeleb [20], which are
not included in the official release). This practice reduces re-
producibility and can propagate artifacts—including annotator-
induced hallucinations—into the resulting ALM. Moreover,
their promptsPare sampled at random from a predefined pool
of 7K options, without validating whether the available meta-
dataA text contains sufficient information to answer the selected
P i.
Next, we complete the construction ofDby generatingR i
text
conditioned on(A i
text,P i). This step faces Challenge (2): for
RLMs, the reasoning trace often exposes that the model is op-
erating on a textual description rather than raw audio (See Ta-
ble 2, first row). Training on such outputs leads to unnatural
responses and encourages the model to treat the audio modality
as text. Adjusting the system prompt is ineffective, since the
model often refers the rules in its reasoning. To preserve the
pretrained capabilities of the RLM and avoid distribution shift
at the same time, we keep the RLM modelQ r frozen and gen-
erate natural targets via a two-stage self-rephrasing procedure.
In stage 1, given(A i
text,P i), we sample an initial response
Ri
0∼Q r(·|A i
text,P i).
In stage 2 we prompt thesame frozenQ r to rewriteR i
0 into
an audio-grounded style (replacing text-based phrasing with
2All instructions are publicly available in the shared repository
368
auditory-perception ones), producing the final target
Ri
text∼Q r(·|R i
0,I reph),
whereI reph specifies the rephrasing rules. Rephrasing is applied
to both the reasoning and the final-answer parts ofR i
0. Because
Ri
text is generated by the same frozenQ r, we avoid weight up-
dates and mitigate output-distribution mismatch; moreover, the
Qr’s thinking process when rephrasing is kept separate from the
returnedR i
text, allowing flexible control viaIreph without leaking
textual-input cues and system rules into the target response. As
shown in the second row of Table 2, the rephrased response
is more natural and treats audio as a distinct modality, which
can improve audio understanding. However, RLM’s reasoning
traces are often lengthy, which is computationally expensive;
we therefore enforce a thinking budget ofB= 1536tokens
during rephrasing; varyingBprovides a direct quality–speed
trade-off. As illustrated in the last row of Table 2, truncating
the rephrasing chain-of-thought yields a slightly less rewritten
Rtext, while remaining perceptually aligned with the audio.
In our experiments, we use Qwen3-4B-Thinking-2507 [16]
as the RLM (Q r) to generate the final responsesR text. This
model also serves as the backbone of our ALM. We make use of
thetraining partitionsof the following datasets in our ALARM
corpus, which consists of 6M total signals (19K hours) and
2.5Muniqueprompts:
•Speech. Cameo [21], GlobeV3 [22], VCTK [23], V o-
calSound [24], ASCEND [25], DisfluencySpeech [26],
NISQA [27], MUCS [28], MLS [29], LibriSpeech [30],
ASVspoof19 [31], ASVspoof5 [32], Noisy VCTK [33, 34].
•Multi-speaker. V oxCeleb 1 [20], Alimeeting [35], AMI Cor-
pus [36], Meld [37], DailyTalk [38], LibriMix [39].
•Music. GTZAN [40], OpenSinger [41], SingMOS [42], Mri-
dangam [43], Nsynth [44], FMA [45], SonicMaster [46].
•Sound. ESC50 [47], FSD50K [48], AudioSet [49], Audio-
Caps [50], Clotho [51].
We further supplement it with additional speech instructions
data. HeySQuAD (human subset) [52] is repeated twice (145K
examples total): (1) questions and (2) questions with additional
textual context based on which the answer should be provided.
In the case of HeySQuAD, the prompt questions are the exact
transcriptions of the audio input. Therefore, there is no need for
the rephrasing stage (Rtext =R 0). We also take 423K examples
from Instructs2s [3]: multi-turn responses are converted into the
textual context, and only the last user query is provided in the
spoken format. The complete distribution across categories is
provided in Table 1.
2.2. ALARM
Our audio reasoning model, ALARM, consists of a frozen RLM
Qr augmented with trainable audio adapters and frozen en-
coders, as shown in Figure 2. The adapters map encoder fea-
tures into the input embedding space ofQ r, enabling the back-
bone to interpret audio representations and produce the desired
outputs. Thus, adapter design and encoder choice are criti-
cal. Prior ALM systems [5, 13, 7, 53, 54, 55] largely rely on
Whisper [56] as a single encoder for both speech and non-
speech audio. Since Whisper is optimized for ASR, its em-
beddings are not optimal for music and general audio under-
standing. Stacking multiple adapters on top of a single en-
coder, as in GAMA [57], cannot compensate for the encoder’s
suboptimal representations of non-target audio types, since the
fundamental limitation imposed by the encoder’s training data
Table 2:Original and rephrased responses with and without
limits from Qwen3-4B-Thinking-2507
Type Model response
Original We aregivenan audio snippet withmeta-
data: [00:00-00:01] I’m on my way to the
meeting.(duration: 1s, emotion: Neu-
tral, gender: Male, age: 34, language:
English)The prompt asks: ”What is the
tone of the speaker’s voice in the audio?”
From the metadata provided, we see:
emotion: Neutral...
Rephrased
(no limit)
Okay, Ilistento the audio clip. The
speaker says ’I’m on my way to the meet-
ing’ during the first second (00:00-00:01).
I perceive the emotional state as neu-
tral, the gender as male, the age as 34,
and the language as English.The prompt
asks: ’What is the tone of the speaker’s
voice in the audio?’...
Rephrased
(limit:1536)
Ihearan audio clip that lasts 1 second,
starting at 00:00 and ending at 00:01. The
speaker says: ”I’m on my way to the meet-
ing.” The prompt asks: ”What is the tone
of the speaker’s voice in the audio?”From
the audio I perceive: emotion: neutral...
distribution persists. We therefore adopt a multi-encoder de-
sign: Whisper for speech, W2V-BERT-2.0 [58] for richer au-
ditory cues from large-scale pretraining, MuQ [59] for music,
and SSLAM [60] for general audio (sound), leveraging their
strong domain-specific performance. However, having informa-
tion from various encoders significantly increases the memory
and computational cost if naively concatenated across the time
dimension due to high token rate (175 Hz for the 4 described
encoders). Simple concatenation across the feature-dimension,
e.g. in SALMONN [8], is also suboptimal because it has limited
ability to capture both cross-encoder interactions and within-
encoder feature dependencies.
We propose three alternative approaches for improved fea-
ture fusion across multiple encoders. The first,ALARM-
CA(Section 2.2.1), stacks consecutive cross-attention fusion
modules, with each module refining the representation pro-
duced by the previous one conditioned on the input. The sec-
ond,ALARM-P(Section 2.2.2), treats Whisper’s features as the
primary stream and uses three separate Perceivers [17] to com-
press the outputs of the other encoders into a fixed set of em-
beddings; these embeddings are then prepended as a prefix to
the Whisper features. In the third approach, we create an en-
semble encoding based onALARM-CAand Whisper, denoted
asALARM-E(Section 2.2.3). The first two approaches operate
at a reduced token rate of 25 Hz (vs. the default 175 Hz), which
lowers overall computation and memory burden.ALARM-E,
on the other hand, operates at 50 Hz and reveals an interesting
trade-off between computational cost and performance.
In all ALARM variations, given(A i
audio,P i,R i
text)∈ D,
each audio encoderG m(·)encodes the input audio signal into a
sequence of frame-level features
f i
m =G m

Ai
audio

∈R Tm×Dm,
369
Figure 2:Overview of ALARM. A pre-trained RLM first generates an initial responseR 0 from textual metadata, then rephrases it into
Rtext. Finally, the RLM is equipped with the audio-fusion module and trained to generateR text from the corresponding audio inputs.
whereT m andD m denote the temporal resolution and feature
dimensionality of encoderG m, respectively.
Since different encoder layers capture complementary in-
formation, we aggregate multi-layer representations using a
trainable weighted average. That is, for each encoderG m (we
useM= 4encoders), we extract hidden states from a selected
set of layersL m and compute
¯f i
m =
X
ℓ∈Lm
αm,ℓf i
m,ℓ, α m,ℓ = exp(wm,ℓ)P
ℓ′∈Lm exp(wm,ℓ′),
wheref i
m,ℓ denotes the hidden representation from layerℓof
encoderG m, and{w m,ℓ}are learnable scalar parameters.
The resulting features ¯fm for each encoder are temporally
compressed to a token rate of 25 Hz and mapped to the em-
bedding space of the frozen RLMQ r using a modality adapter
Θm(·)as:
xi
m = Θm

¯f i
m

∈R
Tm
2 ×Dm.
For most encoders, the adapterΘ m(·)consists of a two-layer
convolutional network that downsamples the feature sequence
from 50 Hz to 25 Hz. For the MuQ encoder, however,Θm(·)is
implemented as a multilayer perceptron (MLP), since its default
token rate is already 25 Hz. The adapted features{xi
m}M
m=1 are
then integrated using the aforementioned fusion approaches, as
elaborated below.
2.2.1. ALARM-CA
In this method, fusion is performed using a stack of cross-
attention blocks that iteratively refine primary encoder features
by conditioning on other encoders. We designate Whisper as
the primary encoder due to its content-focused pretraining and
denote its adapted features byx i
wh. The query of the first cross-
attention is defined as
hi
0 =x i
wh.
The fusion is applied sequentially following a fixed order of
encoders:
Whisper
s=1
→W2V-BERT-2.0
s=2
→MuQ
s=3
→SSLAM.
For each fusion stages∈{1,2,3}, the output of the previous
stage is used as the query and the adapted featuresxs of the next
encoder are passed as keys and values:
hi
s =A s
c

query:h i
s−1;keys,values:x i
s

,
whereA s
c(·;·)denotes a2-layer cross-attention block. The final
fused representationh i
3 is provided to the frozen reasoning lan-
guage modelQ r. Conditioned onh i
3 and the instruction prompt
P i,Q r is trained autoregressively to predict the target sequence
Ri
text using the cross-entropy loss:
L=−
X
t
logpQr

ri
t|r i
<t,h i
3,P i

.
We prepend the final audio featuresh i
3 to the input sequence
before the textual queryP i, as this ordering has been shown
to improve generalization [14]. In addition, two trainable con-
tinuous vectors are inserted before and after the audio features,
respectively, to explicitly separate the audio and text modalities.
Unlike many previous approaches [4, 5, 13], leveraging rich
and continuous input representations avoids the dependency on
voice activity detection (V AD) and mitigates the limitations re-
lated to purely text-based inputs in general audio understanding.
2.2.2. ALARM-P
In this method, the Whisper embeddings,x i
wh, obtained after
the adapter with a 25 Hz token rate, are used as the primary in-
put toQ r, while all the complementary features from the other
encoders are incorporated as a short fixed-length prefix of size
60. We choose Whisper as the primary encoder because our ex-
periments (see Section 4) indicate that, under the ALARM-CA
approach, Whisper representations become less informative for
speech and content-related tasks. Feeding them directly intoQr
therefore preserves their semantical comprehensiveness while
still allowing them to be augmented with additional encoder
features.
To compress other encoders into a short-length prefix, we
apply three separate Perceiver [17] modules with 20 latent
370
queries each to the features ¯f i
m ∈R Tm×Dm extracted from
W2V-BERT-2.0, SSLAM, and MuQ, as follows:
pi
m =A m
p

¯f i
m

∈R 20×Dm,
whereA m
p (·)denotes the Perceiver module associated with en-
coderG m(·). In this setup, the adapterΘ m(·)is no longer re-
quired, sinceA m
p (·)performs both temporal compression and
feature adaptation.
The resulting tokensp i
m are concatenated with the Whisper
featuresx i
wh to form
[pi
W2V-BERT-2.0, pi
MuQ, pi
SSLAM, xi
wh],
which are then passed toQ r. Additionally, two trainable con-
tinuous embeddings are inserted before and after the Perceiver
tokens to explicitly separate them from the Whisper sequence.
The rest of the training pipeline is similar to ALARM-CA.
2.2.3. ALARM-E
Our final fusion strategy,ALARM-E, is applied atinference-
time, with no additional training. InALARM-E, we input two
types of features to capture diverse semantic and perceptual per-
spectives of the audio. By treating each type as a distinct “lis-
tening attempt”, the model can utilize these viewpoints to refine
its overall interpretation. In particular, we concatenate the fol-
lowing set of features. First, we pass the processed queriesh i
3
from thepretrained ALARM-CA(25 Hz), which already exhibit
strong audio understanding performance. Then, to compensate
for the loss of content retrieval capabilities ofALARM-CA, in
the second listening attempt, we directly pass pretrained Whis-
per adapted featuresw i
wh (25 Hz). We further introduce an aux-
iliary instructionI e that guides the model to process each set
of the audio features focusing on different characteristics. The
attempt number is provided as an additional small instruction
I1,I 2. The resulting audio prompt forALARM-Eis as follows:
[Ie, I1, hi
3, I2, xi
wh].
The final frame rate is 50 Hz. SinceALARM-Eis aninference-
time-onlystrategy, no training with 50 Hz token rate is required.
Each individual fusion module is trained at a 25 Hz token rate,
while the joint fusion module operates at 50 Hz. It should be
noted that 50 Hz is still superior over naively concatenating all
encoders (175 Hz).
3. Experimental Setup
We use pretrained Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct