Towards a Stochastic DNN Approximation of Cochlear Implant
Auditory Models
Theresa Hartmann ID 1, Ian C. Bruce ID 2, Benjamin Lentz ID 1, Rainer Martin ID 1, Anil Nagathil ID 1,2
1 Institute of Communication Acoustics, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany
2 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada
1 firstname.lastname@rub.de, 2 ibruce@ieee.org
Abstract
This paper presents a data-driven approximation of an
electrical-stimulation auditory model using deep neural net-
works. In contrast to existing deterministic approaches, the
proposed method models stochastic characteristics of electri-
cally evoked neural responses. A hierarchical vector-quantized
variational autoencoder is trained to map spectrograms with
Greenwood-type frequency resolution to parameters of a
Gamma distribution which are used to sample probabilistic
mean-rate neurograms. We performed an objective evaluation
based on the Jensen-Shannon divergence and the neurogram
similarity index measure, quantifying distributional and struc-
tural similarity. The evaluation shows that the model effectively
captures the global spectro-temporal structure and essential
stochastic properties of the auditory model, especially at low
and mid frequencies. Overall, this work constitutes a promising
step towards a time-efficient stochastic approximation of
electrical-stimulation auditory models.
Index Terms: Auditory model, deep neural network, neuro-
gram, stochastic behavior
1. Introduction
Cochlear implants (CIs) enable auditory perception in severe
sensorineural hearing loss by replacing the cochlea’s natural
mechano-electrical transduction with electrical stimulation of
the auditory nerve [1]. Although modern CI systems achieve a
high degree of speech intelligibility [2], their performance still
differs from normal hearing, particularly for speech-in-noise
and music perception. These limitations are mainly caused by
reduced spectral resolution and changes in neural coding due
to electrical stimulation [3]. Auditory models are commonly
used to simulate peripheral and neural processing of acoustic
signals [4, 5]. In the context of CIs, auditory models describe
how electrical stimulation pulse trains are transformed into neu-
ral responses and allow investigation of neural mechanisms that
are difficult to study in vivo [6, 7]. However, the high computa-
tional complexity of these models limits their applicability for
large-scale simulations, or time-critical applications [8]. To ad-
dress this, deep learning-based approximations have been pro-
posed that efficiently replicate the input–output behavior of au-
ditory models. Existing approaches focus on deterministic ap-
proximations for normal-hearing and hearing-impaired listeners
[8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] and have been applied, for example, for
the development of speech enhancement and hearing loss com-
pensation algorithms [10, 12]. A key property of electrically
This work has been funded by the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – project number
544277892.
evoked auditory nerve responses is their stochasticity, including
response variability and probabilistic spike generation, which
plays an important role in auditory coding [14, 15]. While re-
cent work has investigated stochastic neural coding using data-
driven methods [13], the stochastic behavior of auditory models
has not been considered in deep-neural-network (DNN) based
approximations. Deterministic models reduce the neural re-
sponse to its average, ignoring variability between individual re-
sponses. This can limit their ability to capture temporal coding
and neural synchrony under electrical stimulation. It can also be
misleading when studying how the auditory system responds to
different stimulation patterns or predicting neural performance
under electrical stimulation.
In this work, we propose a stochastic DNN-based approxi-
mation of time-frequency neural representations (so-called neu-
rograms) generated by a CI auditory model. The proposed
model aims to efficiently reproduce the mean and variance in
neural activity across nerve fibers and time, providing an effi-
cient alternative for CI-specific auditory simulations. The re-
mainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 de-
scribes the used auditory model. Section 3 outlines the DNN
topology that approximates the auditory model. Section 4
presents the experimental setup. Results are described and ana-
lyzed in Section 5. Conclusions are drawn in Section 6.
2. Auditory Model
The auditory model proposed in [6] simulates auditory nerve
responses of CI users for a given input signals(n), wherenis
the discrete-time index, and serves as a reference for our DNN-
based approximations. The model describes the generation of
spikes in individual auditory nerve fibers, which are triggered
by electrical pulses. These spikes can occur in either the periph-
eral axon near the electrode or the central axon near the modio-
lus, with the resulting spread of excitation across adjacent audi-
tory nerve fibers depending on the stimulation parameters and
the spatial extent of the electrical field. Where the spikes oc-
cur depends on the stimulation parameters (current, pulse shape,
and duration) and the fiber’s physiological state. The latter has
impact on latency differences, temporal jitter, refractory behav-
ior, and stochastic variability [16]. The model produces neuro-
grams that represent auditory nerve activity over time and fre-
quency based on post-stimulus time histograms (PSTHs) from
all fibers. Mean-rate (MR) neurogramsy f,t can be obtained
by rebinning the PSTHs into 100µs time bins and smoothing
them with a half-overlapping Hamming window of length 12.8
ms. Here,fdenotes the characteristic frequency (CF) andt
is the frame index. This yields a sampling rate of 156.25 Hz
and preserves temporal envelope information with modulation
frequencies up to 78 Hz [16].
4822
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1872
Greenwood
Spectrogram
(B × 1 × 28915)
(B × 1 × 16 x 1522)Bottom
Encoder
Top
Encoder
(B × 128 × 20 x 94)
(B × 128 × 10 x 47)
Vector
Quantization
Top
Decoder
(B × 128 × 20 x 94)
(B × 128 × 10 x 47)
Vector
Quantization
Bottom
Decoder
(B × 1 × 40 x 189)
(B × 128 × 20 x 94)
Scaleθ
Shapek
Sample
(B × 1 × 40 x 189)s(n) ˆyf,t
Bottom Path: fine structure
Top Path: coarse structure
Figure 1:Hierarchical VQ-VAE-2 processing of Greenwood spectrograms, with bottom and top encoders/decoders and vector quan-
tization. The input signals(n)is transformed to a Greenwood spectrogram, and MR neurogramsˆy f,t are generated using stochastic
Gamma sampling from the output parameters. B denotes the batch size and the numbers at the arrows denote the dimensions.
3. DNN Topology
A hierarchical vector-quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-
V AE-2) architecture [17] is used to approximate the auditory
model for CI users. Compared to classical variational autoen-
coders [18], VQ-V AE-2 employs discrete latent representations,
reducing over-smoothing and enabling more accurate recon-
struction of fine temporal and spectral structures [17]. The
model input is a Greenwood spectrogram, obtained by using
a Greenwood-spaced filterbank to the short-time Fourier trans-
form (STFT) of the audio signals(n). The model outputs an
approximationˆyf,t of the MR neurogramy f,t.
The model follows a two-stage encoder–decoder structure
for processing Greenwood spectrograms, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 1. Each hierarchical level operates at a distinct spectro-
temporal resolution, with top and bottom levels capturing
coarse and fine structures, respectively. The selected design
choices were motivated by requirements of stochastic neuro-
gram modeling and computational efficiency. The bottom en-
coder consists of five 2D convolutional layers, while the top en-
coder includes two 2D convolutional layers, both followed by
a residual stack layer. The output of the bottom encoder is fed
to the top-level encoder. Each encoder output is passed through
a vector quantization layer, mapping it to discrete latent codes.
Following quantization, an upsampling layer restores the spa-
tial dimensions to match the encoder output before feeding it
to the corresponding decoder. Each decoder consists of a 2D
convolutional layer, a residual stack, a transposed convolutional
layer, a final 2D convolutional layer, and batch normalization.
The top-level decoder output is concatenated with the bottom-
level encoder output, and the combined representation is passed
through a vector quantization layer to provide additional coarse-
structure information. The vector quantization layers use code-
books of 512 entries at each hierarchical level. The proposed
VQ-V AE-2 model comprises 2,366,157 trainable parameters.
The bottom decoder outputs the shape parameterkand scale pa-
rameterθof a Gamma distribution [19] for each time-frequency
bin:f(ˆy) = rk
Γ(k) ˆyk−1e−rˆy,wherer= 1/θis the rate param-
eter andΓ(·)is the Gamma function. While spike generation in
the auditory nerve is commonly modeled using a Poisson dis-
tribution, Poisson sampling is discrete and not directly differ-
entiable, complicating its integration into gradient-based neural
network training. Therefore, a continuous Gamma distribution
is used as a differentiable approximation, for efficient and sta-
ble stochastic sampling. The Gamma distribution can represent
diverse distribution shapes, allowing flexible modeling of re-
sponse patterns under varying stimulation conditions. Usingk
andθ, spike distribution can be modeled in each time-frequency
bin, creating realistic neurogram representations.
4. Experimental setup
4.1. Database
The training and validation data sets consist of 9000 audio seg-
ments derived from LibriV ox speech recordings [20], Urban-
Sound [21], DEMAND [22] noise samples, and the FMA small
music database [23]. The dataset contains 50% music and 50%
speech, with 30% of the speech signals being clean and 70%
being corrupted by environmental noise at signal-to-noise ratios
(SNRs) ranging from -15 dB to 30 dB in 5 dB steps. The data is
split into 7200 samples for training and 1800 samples for vali-
dation. For each audio signal, 10 neurograms were computed in
order to capture the stochastic properties of the auditory model.
A separate test set of 100 audio segments was compiled using
speech from TIMIT [24] and VCTK [25], noise from the Sound
Ideas 6000 library [26], and music from MedleyDB v2 [27]. All
signals have a duration of 1 s, a sampling rate of 24 kHz, and an
average sound pressure level of 65 dB SPL.
4.2. Neurogram generation
The MR neurograms are generated using the auditory model in
[6]. Audio signals are converted to an electrodogram, specify-
ing the stimulation strength for each CI electrode over time. The
electrodograms are computed at a sampling frequency of 1 MHz
using the GMT auditory modeling toolbox [28], which imple-
ments theSpecRescoding strategy [29] to simulate individual
spikes and uses 16 electrodes with center frequencies from 330
Hz to 6.6 kHz. Silent on- and offsets of 2 ms are added, and
to capture spontaneous firing behavior, the electrodograms are
further padded with silence to 1.2 times their original duration.
The electrodogram is then processed by the auditory model to
compute the MR neurogram. The model uses 40 CFs, spaced
according to the Greenwood function between 250 Hz and 16
kHz to cover the spread of excitation, and 50 auditory nerve
fibers per CF. Each fiber is simulated separately at a 1 MHz
sampling rate to model spike timing and stochastic properties
accurately [30]. The resulting MR neurograms are normalized
to [0,1] for faster convergence during training.
4.3. Spectrogram generation
An on- and offset of 2 ms is added to the signal and padded to
1.2 times their original length, similar to the neurogram gen-
eration process. The spectrograms are then computed via the
short-time Fourier transform (STFT) with an FFT length of 512
samples and a hop size of 19 samples to ensure that the spec-
trogram can be mapped to the size of the neurogram. For spec-
tral analysis, a Greenwood-spaced filter bank is used because
it matches the frequency resolution of the neurogram through
4823
250
1240
4600
16000
CF [Hz]
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2250
1240
4600
16000
t[s]
CF [Hz]
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2
t[s]
0
100
200
300
400
487
Spike count
Figure 2:CI mean-rate neurograms obtained from the auditory model (top) and DNN-based approximations (bottom) for an example
music signal (left) and example speech signal (right). Color indicates the spike count in each time–frequency bin.
a physiologically grounded tonotopic mapping. It consists of
16 center frequencies from 330 Hz to 6.6 kHz, defined by the
Greenwood function [31],f c = 165.4 (102.1x−1),wheref c is
the characteristic frequency (in Hz) andx∈(0,1)the normal-
ized cochlear position. The overlapping triangular bands span
neighboring center frequencies, with the highest filter extend-
ing up to 8.4 kHz to match theSpecResspectrogram genera-
tion. The filter bank is applied to the STFT power spectrogram
by linearly combining frequency bins according to the Green-
wood mapping to obtain a Greenwood spectrogram, which is
converted to decibel values relative to maximum spectral power.
Spectral equalization is applied with a gain uniformly increas-
ing from 0 to 6 dB, and the spectrogram is normalized to [0,1].
4.4. Neural network training
The neural network was trained in PyTorch using the Adam op-
timizer [32] at a learning rate of5·10 −5 together with a learn-
ing rate scheduler. The loss function was composed of a re-
construction and a vector quantization loss:L=L recon +L vq.
The reconstruction loss consists of the negative log-likelihood
of the Gamma distribution and an exponentiated MSE term:
Lrecon = 1
2Lnll + 1
2Lmse. The negative log-likelihood loss is
defined as
Lnll = 1
BFT
BX
b=1
FX
f=1
TX
t=1
h
log Γ(k(b)
f,t)−k (b)
f,t logr (b)
f,t (1)
−(k (b)
f,t−1) logy (b)
f,t +r (b)
f,ty(b)
f,t
i
,
whereBis the batch size,findexes the frequency bin,tindexes
the time bin,y f,t is the target neurogram value, andk f,t and
rf,t are the shape and rate parameters of the predicted Gamma
distribution (r f,t = 1/θ f,t). The exponentiated MSE loss is
defined as
Lmse = 1
BFT
BX
b=1
FX
f=1
TX
t=1
[((ˆy(b)
f,t)0.3−(y (b)
f,t)0.3)2].(2)
This term improves pointwise reconstruction accuracy, while
the exponent 0.3 reduces the influence of high-energy compo-
nents and yields a more balanced reconstruction [33]. The quan-
tization of the latent codes is taken into account by the commit-
ment loss
Lvq = β
B
BX
b=1
LX
l=1
||q(b)
l −e (b)
l ||2
2,(3)
withβ= 0.2,las the index over the latent codes,eas the out-
put of the encoder andqas the output of the vector quantization.
Training was terminated with early stopping if the validation
error showed no improvement over 20 epochs. The maximum
number of epochs was set to 100, and the model with the mini-
mum validation error was saved.
4.5. Statistical evaluation
For each signal in the test set, 100 neurogram realizations
were generated using both the auditory model and the DNN.
The intensity distributions resulting from the original model
and the DNN approximation were compared separately for
each time–frequency bin using the Jensen–Shannon divergence
(JSD) to assess how well the DNN reproduces the stochastic fir-
ing statistics of auditory nerve fiber populations. Note, that the
JSD values ranges from zero, which means the distributions are
completely overlapping, to one, indicating no similarity. The
similarity between neurograms was evaluated using the Neuro-
gram Similarity Index Measure (NSIM) [34], which quantifies
structural similarity on a scale from zero to one. The scaling
parameters proposed by [16] for MR neurograms were adopted.
NSIM was computed between pairs of 100 independently gen-
erated neurograms per signal and averaged across all signals to
quantify the stochastic variability of the reference model and
the consistency of the DNN outputs. Approximation accuracy
was assessed by additionally computing NSIM between neuro-
grams averaged over 10 realizations of the DNN output and the
corresponding averaged neurograms of the reference model.
5. Results and Discussion
Figure 2 shows a comparison of example neurograms. The
DNN approximation captures the overall neurogram structure,
reproducing the main patterns across time and frequency. How-
ever, the approximated neurograms appear noisier than those
obtained with the original model. Although the network re-
ceives the full spectrogram as input and the Gamma parameters
kandθdepend on the entire receptive field, the stochastic sam-
ples are drawn independently for each time–frequency bin. As a
result, temporal and spectral correlations between neighboring
bins, which are essential for capturing coordinated firing across
fibers and fine temporal patterns in the auditory nerve, are not
explicitly modeled by the sampling procedure. The independent
sampling is the reason why the model’s capacity to reproduce
structured patterns across channels or time steps is constrained,
although it is important for reproducing temporal features such
as fine timing cues in complex sounds or music.
Results of the JSD evaluation are shown in Figure 3. The
DNN reproduces low- and mid-frequency activity accurately
4824
0 0.5 1250
800
2300
6155
16000
t[s]
CF [Hz]
0 0.5 1
t[s]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
JSD
250 800 2300 6155 160000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CF [Hz]
Mean JSD
Music
Speech (clean)
Speech (noisy)
(a) (b)
Figure 3:Jensen–Shannon divergence (JSD) between original and DNN-generated neurograms. (a) JSD maps the same music (left)
and the speech (right) example as Figure 2. (b) Mean JSD across all test signals as a function of characteristic frequency (CF).
and captures spontaneous fiber firing during silent periods,
which is visible in the example time-frequency JSD represen-
tations in Figure 3 (a). However, in a range between approx-
imately 6 to 7 kHz the error increases noticeably. Similarly,
Figure 3 (b), which shows temporal JSD averages and standard
deviations across the whole test sets, indicates that the DNN has
difficulty to fully replicate the stochastic distribution in this fre-
quency range. A possible explanation for this behavior is that
higher-frequency regions carry lower energy, thus contribut-
ing less to the loss during training and making their stochastic
patterns more difficult to learn. Furthermore, locations in the
cochlea corresponding to approximately 6.6 kHz are directly
stimulated by the CI electrodes. However, responses of fibers at
higher frequencies arise indirectly through the spread of excita-
tion rather than direct stimulation. Consequently, these regions
receive very low signal power and exhibit transitions from ac-
tivation to silence, making it difficult for the DNN to approx-
imate them. Since the Greenwood spectrogram used as input
only represents characteristic frequencies up to approximately
6.6 kHz, the network receives no direct input information for
higher-frequency regions, meaning that activity above 6.6 kHz
must instead be learned implicitly through spread-of-excitation
patterns in the target neurograms. In Figure 3 (b), the stan-
dard deviation of the JSD values is noticeably higher for speech
signals than for music signals. Speech contains more frequent
transitions between active signal segments and silence. These
transitions make the stochastic distributions harder to approx-
imate and therefore increase the variability of the JSD values,
particularly for noisy speech.
The NSIM values (Table 1) summarize the similarity be-
tween neurograms for music and speech. High NSIM val-
ues between original neurograms indicate strong similarity,
with values slightly below one reflecting the intrinsic stochas-
tic variability of the auditory model. NSIM values between
two DNN-generated neurograms indicate that the DNN repro-
duces stochastic variability to some extent, though with slightly
more variation than the original neurograms. Higher NSIMs
for speech, particularly for clean speech, suggest that the DNN
models speech more accurately, likely due to its more pre-
dictable structure, fewer high-frequency components, and more
Table 1:Mean NSIM (±SD) averaged over all test signals.
Orig.–Orig. reflects auditory model variability, DNN–DNN
model consistency, and Orig.–DNN NSIM is computed for av-
erages of 10 neurograms per signal.
Orig. vs Orig. DNN vs DNN Orig. vs DNN
Music 0.90±0.02 0.70±0.02 0.91±0.01
Speech (clean) 0.94±0.02 0.80±0.03 0.91±0.04
Speech (noisy) 0.91±0.02 0.71±0.03 0.90±0.02
pauses, whereas music’s broader frequency range and finer
spectral details are more challenging. Overall, the DNN ap-
proximates the mean structure and part of the stochastic proper-
ties of auditory nerve responses, performing slightly better for
speech, but exhibits deficiencies at higher frequencies. To eval-
uate how well the DNN approximates the mean structure of the
original responses, neurograms averaged over 10 stochastic re-
alizations were used for the NSIM calculation. This averaging
reduces pixel-wise variability and mitigates distortions caused
by the noisy stochastic approximation. The NSIM values also
show that the DNN closely approximates the mean structure of
the original auditory model responses.
At the same time, we found that the DNN approach requires
smaller computation times compared to the original auditory
model. For 10 examples of the test set (each with a duration of 1
s), the proposed DNN achieved an average computation time of
4.6·10 −3 (±1·10 −3)s when executed on an NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 4070 GPU. When executed on the CPU, the same DNN
achieved a mean computation time of21·10 −3 (±2·10 −4)s
on an Intel Core i7-14700K CPU with 8 performance cores. For
comparison, the original model, evaluated in MATLAB using
the 8 performance cores, required a mean computation time of
68.96 (±0.26)s.
6. Conclusion
This work presents a first deep learning-based approach to ap-
proximate stochastic CI auditory nerve neurograms using a hier-
archical VQ-V AE-2. The model captures both the overall struc-
ture and the stochastic variability of individual neural responses,
particularly at low frequencies and during spontaneous firing.
High-frequency activity and fine temporal correlations remain
challenging, leading to noisier reconstructions and incomplete
modeling of coordinated firing patterns. While the model repro-
duces variability observed in the reference neurograms, it does
not explicitly model the underlying physiological mechanisms.
Hence, it is necessary to evaluate the physiological and behav-
ioral relevance of the learned stochastic variability. Despite
these limitations, this approach offers a fast, data-driven alter-
native to the computationally intensive original auditory model.
This enables applications such as real-time auditory modeling,
testing of CI processing strategies, and perception-based signal
processing, including speech and music enhancement in hear-
ing devices under more realistic neural variability. A notable
feature of the model is the use of differentiable Gamma sam-
pling, which allows direct integration of stochastic neurogram
outputs into a loss function. The method also sets the stage for
future improvements in capturing temporal and spectral corre-
lations, potentially leading to more accurate, physiologically re-
alistic neurogram simulations and their applicability in research
on hearing devices.
4825
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
This paper was prepared using generative AI to enhance gram-
mar and readability. We subsequently reviewed and revised the
text as necessary and take full responsibility for the content of
this publication.