Accent-Emotion Entanglement in LM-Based Text-to-Speech Systems
Matthew Hayden1,∗∗, Jinzuomu Zhong ID 1, Korin Richmond ID 1
1 Centre for Speech Technology Research, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
matthayden2301@gmail.com,{jinzuomu.zhong, korin.richmond}@ed.ac.uk
Abstract
Speaker similarity metrics (SSM) are widely used for quick and
easy evaluation of zero-shot text-to-speech (ZS-TTS) systems.
However, using a case study of two ZS-TTS systems that have
comparable SSM, we show such metrics may fail to capture
important speech characteristics such as accent, and that rely-
ing on them can hide errors. We identify a phenomenon termed
accent–emotion entanglement, whereby emotion conditioning
can unintentionally alter accent, which is not reflected in pre-
viously reported high speaker similarity scores. We evaluate
the systems with accent SMOS listening tests, and visualisation
and cosine-distance analysis of embeddings. One has substan-
tial accent variability, with SMOS ranging from 1.17–4.13 and
centroid cosine distances up to 0.06, while the other is stable.
The results of our proposed approach highlight the limitations
of standard speaker similarity metrics, and that targeted subjec-
tive and objective measures are needed to reveal hidden synthe-
sis errors.
Index Terms: accent, speech synthesis, emotion, zero-shot
1. Introduction
Significant focus in TTS research has recently shifted to zero-
shot systems, which aim to imitate a speaker given only a short
sample of their speech. Strong claims about producing speech
that is very close, or equivalent, in quality to human recordings
have arisen [1, 2, 3]. However, while both the capabilities of
these models and the amount of data used to train them have
increased rapidly, systematic and comprehensive evaluation has
arguably failed to keep pace [4, 5]. Often, a single speaker sim-
ilarity metric is relied upon to address the myriad features that
distinguish one speaker from another. Accent, for example, is
a prominent and very important component of speaker identity,
but evaluating accent fidelity is far from straightforward using
either objective or subjective testing [5], and so ZS-TTS stud-
ies have rarely included significant analysis of accent. More
extensive and targeted listening by native speakers, however,
can uncover issues that are not reflected in a simple automated
speaker similarity score. This paper focuses on a singular, spe-
cific example of such issues. In experiments usinginstruction
modein CosyV oice2’s [6] to control emotion in the synthesised
speech, we have previously observed significant inconsistency
in accent of the generated speech. Inaccurate or inconsistent ac-
cent in synthetic speech has been termedaccent hallucination
[7]. This observation prompted us to look more closely at this
issue.
CosyV oice2, an open-source TTS system based around the
Qwen2.5-0.5B large language model (LLM), can accept both a
**indicates the corresponding author.
Table 1:Speaker similarity measured by a WavLM-based model
and ERes2Net (in brackets). Results reproduced from [6].
Model test-en test-hard
SS↑SS↑
Human0.734 (0.742) -
V ocoder Resyn.0.700 -
MaskGCT0.714 (0.730) 0.748 (0.720)
CosyV oice 20.652 (0.736) 0.724 (0.776)
reference speech sample and a text instruction as conditioning
to guide synthesis. In principle, this provides flexibility, how-
ever we have found that providing the instruction ‘Make this
soundx’, withxrepresenting a given emotion, together with ref-
erence audio portraying the same emotion, can result in a wide
variety of distinct accents being realised. No accent similarity
metrics are reported in [6], and indeed the instruction mode is
evaluated only for Chinese. Instead, speaker similarity metrics
are reported for the in-context learning mode from tests on the
test-enandtest-hardEnglish datasets taken from Seed-TTS [8],
which are reproduced for the reader’s convenience in Table 1.
Results are given for two speaker similarity metrics, one
using ERes2Net [9] and another based on WavLM. The au-
thors compare the performance of CosyV oice2 with a compet-
ing ZS-TTS system that has also shown strong performance:
MaskGCT [10, 11]. Scores are fairly close and also mixed,
with the WavLM-based metric favouring MaskGCT for both
test sets and the opposite result for ERes2Net (ERes2Net is sub-
sequently the metric used in the remainder of [6]). In contrast
to these results, however, we have found in extensive evaluation
of MaskGCT synthesis samples previously that its accent gen-
eration generally tends to be consistent. And so, there is a clear
mismatch apparent between what the speaker similarity metrics
show and our own subjective impressions of the accents evident
in the speech samples. This raises the question of how far these
metrics either capture or disentangle accent.
While these observations focus on only 2 models, they may
exemplify an overarching issue in TTS evaluation and reporting.
Accent fidelity and accuracy is seldom addressed explicitly in
ZS-TTS studies (e.g. no mention of accent hallucination is made
in [6]). Commonly used objective metrics such as speaker simi-
larity can easily fail to account for key characteristics of speech,
including accent in this case. Accents are integral not only to
understanding but also to identity. Unintentionally removing a
speaker’s accent or switching it for another is far from desirable.
Moreover, while any form of accent hallucination is an issue,
accent hallucination tied to emotion is especially problematic,
3590
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2749
as it may lead a TTS system propagating harmful stereotypes
which link emotions to certain cultures or people (such as that
of the ‘angry black woman’ [12]). Given all this, we here first
aim to investigate the exact nature and prevalence of this phe-
nomenon, which we dub accent-emotion entanglement. Simul-
taneously, we seek to explore how accent realisation can best
be evaluated systematically and effectively, developing an ap-
proach which we demonstrate can reveal issues with accent in
synthetic speech. Ultimately, we thus advocate that all ZS-TTS
work should take into account accent and explicitly evaluate for
it. To summarise, this work makes the following contributions:
• We highlight the existence of a phenomenon that has not pre-
viously been addressed in the literature:Accent-Emotion
Entanglement, where instructions or reference audio pro-
vided to a TTS system may unintentionally influence accent.
• We characterise the nature of accent-emotion entanglement
and how it impacts accent realisation.
• We present evaluation methods, both subjective and objec-
tive, and advocate to routinely consider these in future TTS
research to identify possibly weak accent modelling.
2. Related Work
We cannot find previous work in the literature which describes
how controlling affect in a TTS system, such as emotion, can
unintentionally influence accent realisation; our study here is,
we believe, the first to do so. There has been some previous re-
search [13, 14, 15] that has explored the disentanglement of ac-
cent from speaker embeddings in order to produce speech with-
out the accent of the original speaker, for example. However, in
such work, accent hallucination refers to leakage of the refer-
ence speaker’s original accent into the synthesised speech. This
differs from the case observed in CosyV oice2 where the hallu-
cinated accent is not present in the input at all - neither in the
reference speech nor in the instruction prompts.
3. Method
3.1. Model and dataset selection
As a case-study to explore accent-emotion entanglement in ZS-
TTS more broadly, we have systematically tested and compared
MaskGCT [10] and CosyV oice 2. MaskGCT is a language
model based system, just as CosyV oice 2, which is publicly
available and has known training data sources. The model was
trained using the English segment of the Emilia [16] dataset
which contains over 50k hours of in-the-wild speech. The
MEAD dataset [17] was used for testing. MEAD is an En-
glish audio-visual dataset with 60 actors portraying 8 emotions
at 3 intensity levels. The emotionshappy,angryandneutral
were used in our experiments, with all utterances having inten-
sity level 2, excludingneutralwhich was only recorded with
one level of intensity. Forhappyandangryutterances, the in-
struction ‘Make this soundx’ was given.Neutralutterances re-
ceived no instruction. MaskGCT does not allow for instruction
fine-tuning, and so it was only provided with emotion-specific
reference audio.
3.2. Speaker and utterance selection
A reference speaker was required to act as a ground truth com-
parison point in the listening test. Only 1 speaker was used due
to budget constraints. Further speakers were tested in the objec-
tive experiments. When selecting a speaker it was important to
consider that CosyV oice 2 appears to default to a General Amer-
ican accent in synthesis, regardless of the reference speaker’s
accent. While this is notable, it was not the focus of our ex-
periments. Thus, the male speaker named M007 in MEAD was
selected following a pilot study measuring accent SMOS which
found they were rated as most similar to a number of American-
accented speakers from the Common Accent dataset [18].
MEAD provides 13 sentences in common to all emotions1.
From these, the first 3 were selected as candidates to act as refer-
ence speech to the models, providing speaker and accent infor-
mation. Sentence003was excluded as it was markedly shorter.
Sentence001was selected at random following a pilot study
which showed that the content of reference speech had a mini-
mal impact on accent realisation in both systems. The remain-
ing 10 sentences were candidates to act as target utterances, the
text to be synthesised.025was excluded due to concerns its
race-related contents may skew accent perception. The remain-
ing 9 sentences were then each synthesised 100 times for each
emotion using both TTS systems, resulting in 5,400 total ut-
terances. Each utterance was passed to the accent recognition
system GenAID [7] to produce a probability distribution across
13 possible accents, and from these the average entropy of the
100 utterances in each condition was calculated as:
kX
i=1
p(xi)·ln(p(x i))(1)
wherek= 13. Following this, sentences021, 022, 023, 026
and027were chosen to act as target text. These sentences
represented a spread of outcomes. For example,021led to
CosyV oice 2 producing very high entropies for all 3 emotions
while023resulted in very similar entropies between CosyV oice
2, MaskGCT and the ground truth for all emotions.
3.3. Subjective and objective evaluation
A subjective evaluation was conducted focusing on accent
SMOS. Participants were presented with 2 utterances, one syn-
thesised and one ground truth equivalent, and were asked to rate
their similarity based solely on accent. The ground truth was
taken from intensity level 2 of M007, the reference speaker,
in the MEAD dataset and matched the synthesised utterance
in content and emotion. Synthesised utterances were chosen
based on cosine similarity. The previously synthesised utter-
ances were again passed to GenAID, but were now extracted
at the penultimate layer to produce an accent embedding. This
same process was applied to their ground truth equivalents from
MEAD. Cosine similarity was then calculated between each
synthesised embedding and the ground truth. The utterance
with the lowest similarity was chosen for each condition. Some
MaskGCT utterances were excluded as they contained signifi-
cant artifacts which made accent perception difficult. In such
cases, the next lowest scoring utterance was selected. Thirty
participants were recruited using Prolific2, balanced for sex and
in the age range 25-64 years. Participants were paid £12/hour
and spread equally across the UK, USA, South Africa, Ireland
and Australia. All participants had English as their L1 and pri-
mary language. The test consisted of 30 questions, one for
each condition, as well as 5 attentions checks which compared
ground truth utterances to themselves.
The objective measures went beyond the single speaker and
30 utterances used in the listening test. An additional 3 speak-
1https://wywu.github.io/projects/MEAD/support/MEAD-supp.pdf
2https://www.prolific.com/
3591
Table 2:Accent similarity mean opinion scores (SMOS) and their standard deviation for CosyV oice2 and MaskGCT across different
emotions and target texts. Target texts taken from the MEAD dataset. (Bold shows highest scoring emotion, italics the lowest scoring.)
System Emotion Accent SMOS Scores by Target Text↑
021 022 023 026 027
CosyV oice 2
Angry1.33± 1.033.54± 1.23.04± 1.351.25± 0.862.63± 1.24
Happy1.17± 0.491.42± 0.791.21± 0.851.25± 0.854.13± 1.06
Neutral 4.13± 0.871.67± 1.031.75± 1.012.04± 1.354.00± 0.85
MaskGCT
Angry3.75± 1.143.33± 1.183.75± 1.013.92± 1.24.13± 0.9
Happy3.79± 1.24.04± 1.153.79± 0.83.5± 1.043.83± 1.07
Neutral 4.33± 0.783.96± 0.713.83± 1.073.42± 0.783.83± 1.03
ers were selected from the MEAD dataset for use as reference
speech:M012, W018andW033. These were chosen at ran-
dom, while ensuring representation of both sexes though, with
1 male and 2 female speakers. For each speaker, 100 utterances
were synthesised using each TTS system for every target text
and emotion. These were again passed through GenAID and
accent embeddings extracted at the penultimate layer. These
embeddings served 2 purposes: 1) UMAP [19] was used to plot
each utterance as a 2D point, creating an accent space where
utterances not conforming to the expected accent can be eas-
ily identified; 2) the accent embeddings for each TTS system,
as well as the ground truth utterances, were used to calculate
centroids, and average distance from these was used to measure
accent variability.
4. Results
4.1. Subjective evaluation results
The listening test results are presented in Table 2. They show
accent hallucination occurs in all emotions and across all target
texts in CosyV oice 2. This is not the case for MaskGCT. We find
that the choice of emotion and target text do impact accent real-
isation in CosyV oice 2: not all utterances show the same degree
of accent hallucination and some see none at all. A selection of
the utterances can be heard here 3. The high standard deviation
in CosyV oice 2’s results (1.16) compared to MaskGCT’s (0.26)
also point to lower consistency in accent realisation.
4.2. Objective evaluation results
The UMAP-reduced embeddings for speaker M007 are pre-
sented in Figure 1, shown as a kernel density estimation plot for
clearer visualisation. Equivalent scatter plots as well as plots
for further speakers can also be seen on our demo page 4. The
UMAP space was fitted to CommonAccent, VCTK and MEAD
ground truth embeddings. Ground truth reference points for ac-
cents are included from CommonAccent [18] and VCTK 5. 50
utterances were selected at random from speakers with each ac-
cent. The centroid of the ground truth utterances for each emo-
tion are also plotted. This represents the accent embeddings
averaged across the 5 target texts and reduced to 2 dimensions.
These plots visualise differences in accent realisation be-
tween MaskGCT and CosyV oice2 clearly. Where MaskGCT’s
utterances are grouped tightly around both the ground truth cen-
troids and the North American accent references, CosyV oice2’s
are spread across the space. This pattern is repeated for other
3https://accemoentangle.github.io/
4See footnote 3
5https://datashare.ed.ac.uk/handle/10283/3443
Table 3:Average cosine distance between an utterance and cor-
responding centroid. (Bold shows highest respective distance,
italics the upper/lower bounds.)
Speaker Emotion Cosine Distance to Centroid by System
Ground Truth CosyV oice 2 MaskGCT
M007
Angry0.0170.0320.017
Happy0.0170.0550.010
Neutral0.0340.0350.026
M012
Angry0.0190.0380.014
Happy0.0140.0580.017
Neutral0.0160.0330.013
W018
Angry0.0330.0390.037
Happy0.0140.0520.020
Neutral0.0170.0290.024
W033
Angry0.0200.0390.023
Happy0.0280.0540.029
Neutral0.0190.0420.033
speakers. There are clear regions ofhappy(blue) andangry
(orange) utterances with Indian/South Asian accents,neutral
(green) utterances with British/Irish accents and utterances from
all 3 emotions displaying a variety of East Asian and African ac-
cents. The increased spread of accents in CosyV oice2 utterances
is quantified in Table 3 in terms of the average cosine distance
between an utterance’s GenAID embedding and its centroid for
each system and emotion. CosyV oice2 has the greatest distance
in every condition confirming the increased variability seen in
both the accent SMOS scores and the UMAP plots.
5. Discussion
5.1. Evaluating similarity between speakers
Comparison of the subjective and objective results confirmed
the benefit of using a diverse range of metrics and methods
when measuring accent similarity. Human-centric measures
such as SMOS scores ground any findings in real world percep-
tual differences. This allows for quick and easy confirmation
or rejection of objective results which raise a warning flag. For
example, the specific utterance chosen to represent CosyV oice
2 for target text021withneutralemotion in the listening test
had a markedly low cosine similarity (0.70) to its ground truth
equivalent. This could signify that the synthesised utterance
was atypical and thus may show accent hallucination. How-
ever, the UMAP visualisation disputed this as the utterance was
situated exactly where expected, clustered with otherneutralut-
3592
Figure 1:Kernel density estimation showing density of accent embeddings in a 2D UMAP space for synthesised and ground truth
utterances. Accent ground truth points are taken from the CommonAccent and VCTK datasets.
terances amongst the North American accents. Accent SMOS
scores helped to solve this disagreement. The utterance scored
highly (4.13), suggesting an issue with the cosine similarity, not
the UMAP visualisation. Without the subjective results from
the listening test, the utterance’s true nature may not have been
confirmed. Subjective evaluations allow us to validate that any
metric is measuring or approximating what it is intended to.
Our results demonstrate even smaller-scale tests, such as the
one described here, can provide invaluable information without
prohibitive costs or time requirements.
Many TTS papers use speaker similarity metrics that are
poorly defined or described. Although a TTS system’s results
may be compared with ground truth or vocoded natural stimuli,
it is often not obvious what speaker similarity captures and how
any differences would actually be realised perceptually. Plac-
ing such metrics alongside subjective results, as in [10], gives
a clearer guide as to how to interpret them and what they mean
for speech quality. The accent SMOS results align very well
with the average entropies of utterance accent probability dis-
tributions, high SMOS scores were largely matched with lower
average entropy. Validating the entropy results in this way has
the same effect as the results comparison in [10], allowing the
reader to place the results of a novel objective metric in the con-
text of an easily understandable listening test. Similarly, using
a wider range of objective measures and visualisations can help
to paint a clearer picture of speech quality and confirm that cer-
tain results are not outliers. We argue, therefore, it is critical to
provide a diverse range of evaluation metrics, both subjective
and objective, in order to validate and clarify synthesis results.
5.2. The origins of accent hallucination in CosyV oice2
Without knowing what data was used to train CosyV oice2, it
is difficult to answer why we see accent-emotion entangle-
ment. Considering the similarities between MaskGCT and
CosyV oice2 in design we believe that the issue does not stem
from the architecture of the model. Instead, the root cause may
lie in the instruction fine-tuning data. Though little detail is
given, we do know it was labelled with emotion automatically
using SenseV oice [20]. It could be that SenseV oice mistakes ac-
cent features for emotion ones, labelling, for example,neutral
Nigerian-accented speech as angry in part because of the ac-
cent. This could lead to certain accents being over-represented
for some emotions in the instruction dataset and in turn to unex-
pected trends including accent-emotion entanglement. Alterna-
tively, the accent hallucination could stem from imbalances in
the dataset. It might be that, as an example, British speakers are
truly over-represented in theneutralinstruction dataset. This
would greatly increase the likelihood of CosyV oice2 hallucinat-
ing a British accent for utterances withneutralemotional input.
We are limited to supposition though and cannot pin down the
root cause without access to the training data for CosyV oice2.
This highlights one of the many issues with keeping such infor-
mation private.
6. Conclusion
Our work here has introduced and described an observation that
we term accent-emotion entanglement, defined as accent hal-
lucination caused or guided by the emotion content of the in-
put provided to a TTS system. We tested both MaskGCT and
CosyV oice2 to explore the issue. We found little or no accent
hallucination occurring in utterances produced by MaskGCT,
whereas CosyV oice2 frequently hallucinated accents. This was
shown by the results of a listening test and various objec-
tive measures we have proposed, including accent embedding
UMAP projection and cosine distance to a centroid. Further-
more, we discussed the negative impact of relying upon overly
simple speaker similarity metrics and instead urge TTS re-
searchers to use of a combination of subjective and more spe-
cific objective measures to avoid overlooking issues similar to
accent-emotion entanglement.
3593
7. Use of Generative AI Disclosure
Generative AI was not used in the writing of this paper nor was
it used in the design of the study or interpretation of results.