Spec2Spatial: A Time-Frequency Spatial Attention Network for Binaural
Audio Synthesis
Changjun He1, Wenjie Zhang2, Shiyun Xu2, Lianyu Zhou1, Weiping Chen1,∗∗, Mingjiang Wang2,∗∗
1 Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China
changjunhe@stu.hit.edu.cn, mjwang@hit.edu.cn, chenwp@hit.edu.cn
Abstract
Binaural audio can provide realism and immersion, and it is
widely used in scenarios such as virtual reality. The difficulty
of binaural recording has motivated research on binaural audio
synthesis. Deep learning-based binaural synthesis is promis-
ing, but existing methods still perform poorly, especially in
reproducing interaural differences. In this paper, we propose
Spec2Spatial, a time-frequency spatial attention network for
binaural audio synthesis. Specifically, we introduce an inter-
aural spatial attention network to capture left-right relations in
the frequency domain. Additionally, we propose a condition fu-
sion residual network that uses sound source position to adjust
time-frequency features. Experiments on the Binaural Speech
dataset show that Spec2Spatial synthesizes realistic binaural au-
dio, achieving state-of-the-art DILD (1.250), DITD (0.034), and
MRSTFT (1.174).
Index Terms: binaural audio synthesis, interaural differences,
spatial perception, spatial audio
1. Introduction
Spatial audio is a special type of audio format that differs from
regular monaural and stereo audio, providing enhanced spatial
awareness and realism for the listener [1, 2]. To perfectly repro-
duce spatial audio, speaker playback and binaural rendering are
the two main methods [3, 4]. Among them, binaural rendering
is widely used in various scenarios due to its convenience and
low cost.
Imagine a scenario in a large offline conference room,
where the speaker is presenting on stage. The audience in the
room can perceive the speaker’s position and movement through
sound. However, the audience watching online through the net-
work can only hear the content of the sound and cannot perceive
the speaker’s movement. In response to this issue, if binaural
audio synthesis can be performed during the speech and trans-
mitted to the online audience, they will also be able to experi-
ence an immersive sound experience.
Binaural audio synthesis has been extensively studied, but
most of it is implemented using traditional digital signal pro-
cessing (DSP)-based methods. These methods treat the process
of sound propagation from the source to the ears as a linear
time-invariant system and model factors such as head-related
transfer functions (HRTF), room responses, and environmen-
tal noise [5, 6, 7, 8]. This approach is simple and easy to im-
plement, but the existing HRTFs are discontinuous. For posi-
tions that are not included, interpolation and other methods are
needed, which can introduce errors and lead to cumulative er-
rors throughout the system [9].
**indicates the corresponding author.
Although many new DSP-based studies have been done to
solve these problems, considering that deep learning has been
widely applied to speech enhancement, speech recognition, and
speech synthesis with remarkable performance [10, 11, 12, 13],
deep learning methods may provide a new and even more ef-
fective solution for binaural audio synthesis, which has started
to be explored. Numerous multimodal binaural audio synthesis
methods are proposed initially, where video frame information
is used as an auxiliary condition to synthesize binaural audio
[14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. However, these methods take pseudo-mono
mixtures of left and right recordings as training inputs, instead
of modeling the true source-to-ear propagation.
To solve this issue, Richard et al. [19] consider the real
sound propagation process and employ a deep learning-based
method to synthesize binaural audio in the time domain for the
first time. This breakthrough has proven to be effective and
meaningful. Following [19], the diffusion-based BinauralGrad
model is proposed [20]. In contrast, Lee et al. [21] propose the
Neural Fourier Shift network in the frequency domain, which
works well for extending to out-of-domain audio. Huang et al.
[22] apply discrete vector quantization variational autoencoders
for binaural audio synthesis. Liang et al. [23] propose a con-
ditional flow matching model to render binaural audio and im-
plement flow inference. In addition to these end-to-end meth-
ods, Gebru et al. [9] use a DNN-based approach to estimate
HRTF and synthesize binaural audio, while Richard et al. [24]
propose the IR-MLP network, which estimates the impulse re-
sponse from positional information for binaural synthesis.
It is well established that human spatial hearing primarily
depends on interaural time difference (ITD) and interaural level
difference (ILD) [25]. Nevertheless, existing methods men-
tioned above still struggle to reproduce these cues faithfully,
leaving a noticeable gap between synthesized binaural audio
and real recordings. To address this, we propose Spec2Spatial,
a time-frequency spatial attention network for binaural audio
synthesis with explicit modeling of interaural cues and source-
position conditioning. The contributions of our work can be
summarized as follows:
• We propose Spec2Spatial, a time-frequency spatial attention
framework that explicitly models interaural cues in the STFT
domain, aiming to better preserve ILD and ITD compared
with existing methods.
• We design an interaural spatial attention network (ISAN) that
performs cross-ear attention on time-frequency representa-
tions to capture frequency-dependent interaural correspon-
dences, producing spatially-aware features that improve ILD
and ITD.
• We further introduce a condition fusion residual network
(CFRN) to inject sound-source position into the time-
3339
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-607
Position &
Orientation
(a)
C-Linear
GeLU
Split
F-Linear
C-Linear
AvgPool AvgPool
Conv1D+
ReLU
Conv1D+
Sigmoid
EAM
Conv1D+
ReLU
Conv1D+
Sigmoid
EAM
H G
(b)
Mono TDW
Concat
ISAN
Conv2D
ISAN
Conv2D
ISAN
Conv2D
ISAN
Upsample
CFRN
Upsample
CFRN
Upsample
CFRN
CFRN
Reshape
Linear
iSTFT
M
,lryy
0G
1G
2G
3G
3M
2M
1M
Mask
Figure 1:Diagrams of (a) the overall structure of the Spec2Spatial network and (b) the interaural spatial attention network (ISAN).
frequency features via residual fusion, enabling location-
aware binaural synthesis. Experimental results demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance on ILD, ITD, and MRSTFT.
2. Methodology
2.1. Overall architecture
The overall structure of the Spec2Spatial network is shown in
Fig. 1 (a). The objective of the model is to output the corre-
sponding binaural audioy= (y l,y r)∈R 2×T based on the
input monaural audiox∈R 1×T and the position and orienta-
tion of the sound sourcec∈R 7×L. It can be represented as:
y= (y l,y r) =h(x|c)(1)
whereTrepresents the length of the audio sequence,Lrepre-
sents the length of the position and orientation withinT, and
each pose is represented by a 7-dimensional vector consisting
of a 4D orientation and a 3D position.
Considering that there is a certain delay in the propagation
of sound from the sound source to the ears, and due to the dif-
ferent positions of the left and right ears, the time taken for
the same sound to reach the left and right ears is also differ-
ent. Therefore, we first follow the design in [19], the monau-
ral audioxis subjected to physical warping through the Time-
Domain Warping (TDW) module, resulting in the preliminary
warped binaural audioy w = (y w
l ,y w
r )∈R 2×T . The physical
warping uses simple geometric calculations to simulate the de-
lay of sound from the source to the ears. It can be represented
as follows:
(yw
l ,y w
r ) =TDW(x|c) =f 1(x, s(c)
vsound
)(2)
wheres(c)represents the distances between the sound source
and the left and right ears, respectively.v sound denotes the speed
of sound.f 1 applies a time-domain shift to the monaural signal
xaccording to the per-ear delays s(c)
vsound
.
However, time-domain warping alone mainly provides a
coarse interaural delay approximation and cannot fully re-
produce the frequency-dependent interaural cues, such as
ILD. Therefore, we further refine the warped signals in the
time–frequency domain. The Short Time Fourier Transform
(STFT) is applied to obtain the time-frequency domain fea-
tures(Y w
l ,Y w
r )∈R F×T , which are concatenated to obtain
Y w ∈R 2×F×T . Then, to focus on the relationship between
the left and right ears and extract multi-scale time-frequency
featuresG i, an interaural spatial attention network (ISAN) and
Conv2D are used:
Gi =ISAN(Conv2D(G i−1)) (3)
In the decoding stage, a multiple condition fusion residual
network (CFRN) and upsample modules are used. To facilitate
feature reuse, element-wise addition is used at each step of the
decoding stage, obtaining masks of different resolutionsM i:
Mi =Upsample(CFRN(M i+1)) +G i−1 (4)
Then Reshape and multiple Linear layers are used to out-
put the final complex maskM={M l
R,M l
I,M r
R,M r
I}, where
M l
R,M l
I,M r
R,M r
I represent the real and imaginary parts of the
complex masks for the left and right ears, respectively. Fi-
nally, following [16], we can obtain the time-frequency features
Y= (Y l,Y r)∈R 2F×T of binaural audio:
Yl = (M l
R +jM l
I )(Y w
l (R) +jY w
l (I))(5)
Yr = (M r
R +jM r
I )(Y w
r (R) +jY w
r (I))(6)
Finally, iSTFT is used to obtain the binaural audio(y l,y r).
2.2. Interaural spatial attention network
To better model interaural level and time differences, we then
operate in the time-frequency domain and propose the interaural
spatial attention network (ISAN). The architecture is shown in
Fig. 1 (b).
First, we apply a channel-wise linear layer followed by a
GeLU activation to the time–frequency featuresH∈R F×T×C
to mix feature channels and enhance cross-channel interactions.
Next, we are inspired by gmlp [26, 27] and splitHalong the
channel dimension into two parts, obtainingH 1∈R F×T× C
2
andH 2∈R F×T× C
2 . We treatH 1 as a gating branch andH 2
as a content branch. For the gating branchH 1, we first perform
a linear projection along the frequency dimension to enable
frequency-dependent modulation. Specifically,H 1 is reshaped
toR
C
2×T×F and processed through a linear layer. Then, both
branches are reshaped toR
C
2 F×T by stacking the frequency
and channel dimensions, and are fed into the Energy Analysis
Module (EAM).
The EAM produces a time–frequency energy attention map
by combining two lightweight branches. The temporal branch
performs average pooling over( C
2F)followed by 1D convolu-
tions and a sigmoid activation to obtain a temporal weight vec-
tor. In parallel, the frequency branch performs average pooling
3340
Dilated
Conv1D
Reshape
c
Linear
Split
Interpolation
ReLU
Conv1D
Conv1D
M
Avg
pool
Max
pool
Figure 2:Diagrams of the condition fusion residual network
(CFRN).
over time, followed by 1D convolutions and a sigmoid activa-
tion to obtain a frequency-related weight vector. Their outer
product yields an attention mapAttn T F∈R
C
2 F×T , which is
applied to reweight the input features via element-wise multi-
plication.
Finally, the refined content and gating features are com-
bined through element-wise multiplication to form a spatial
gating operation. This dynamic gating allows the network to
flexibly control cross-channel information exchange and better
capture the spatial–temporal dependencies required for binau-
ral rendering. In particular, it facilitates learning interaural cues
such as level and time differences. A final linear layer maps the
features back to the original channel dimension, and a residual
connection is applied to produce the output. This process can
be expressed as:
G=FC(EAM(FC(H 1))⊙EAM(H 2)) +H(7)
H1,H 2 =Split(σ(FC(H)))(8)
whereHandGrepresent the input and output of the ISAN. FC
represents the linear layer,⊙indicates element-wise multiplica-
tion,σdenotes the GeLU activation operation, and Split refers
to splitting the features along the channel dimension.
2.3. Condition fusion residual network
After extracting features at different scales, conditional infor-
mation is integrated during the decoding stage to synthesize
binaural audio that closely corresponds to the sound source po-
sition. To achieve this, we propose the condition fusion residual
network (CFRN), as shown in Fig. 2.
First, to increase the receptive field and capture long-range
time-frequency dependencies, the input time-frequency features
M∈R C×F×T are processed through dilated convolution, re-
sulting inM 1 ∈R C×F×T . Then, to incorporate the posi-
tion and orientation of the sound source as the condition in
the decoding process, we use the FiLM to process the condi-
tional informationcand modulate the spectral features [28, 29],
enabling the network to learn better binaural spatial percep-
tion. Specifically, the conditional informationcis reshaped and
passed through a linear layer to obtainc f∈R L×2C. Then,c f
is split along the last dimension and a new dimension is added to
obtain the feature scaling factorα 0∈R C×L×1 and the feature
bias factorβ 0∈R C×L×1. Next,α 0 andβ 0 are interpolated and
aligned withM 1 to obtainα∈R C×F×T andβ∈R C×F×T .
Finally, the input featuresM1 are subjected to element-wise lin-
ear transformations usingαandβ:
M2 =αM 1 +β(9)
In the shortcut pathway, to more effectively capture interau-
ral channel relationships, both average pooling and max pooling
are performed along the channel dimension to derive a channel
attention map, which emphasizes the time–frequency distribu-
tion differences across channels. This attention map is subse-
quently applied to the features via element-wise multiplication.
Finally,M 2 passes through the Relu activation layer and the
Conv1D layer and is added to the shortcut pathway to obtain the
final output.
2.4. Loss function
During training, the model is optimized by minimizing the
multi-faceted loss between the synthesized audioyand the
ground-truth binaural referencey t, as follows:
L(y,y t) =λ 1L2(y,y t) +λ 2Lphase(y,y t) +λ 3LMRSTFT(y,y t)
(10)
whereL 2 represents the wave loss in the time domain between
the synthesized audioyand the ground-truth binaural reference
yt,L phase andL MRSTFT represent the phase loss [19] and multi-
resolution STFT loss [30] in the frequency domain between the
synthesized audioyand the ground-truth binaural referencey t,
respectively.λ i is a hyperparameter.
3. Experiments and Analysis
3.1. Datasets
In the experiment, the Binaural Speech dataset published in [19]
is used. The dataset includes 8 speakers, who are asked to move
around a KEMAR mannequin within a 1.5-meter range while
speaking. For each speaker, monaural audio is collected using
a microphone placed near their mouth, and binaural audio is
recorded using microphones placed at the left and right ears of
the KEMAR mannequin. Additionally, the OptiTrack system is
used to record the speaker’s positional information.
The dataset includes a total of two hours of recorded au-
dio, with approximately 15 minutes for each speaker. Both the
monaural and binaural audio are recorded at a sampling rate
of 48 kHz, while the position and orientation of the speaker
are recorded at a sampling rate of 120 Hz. Each position-and-
orientation recording is represented as a 7-dimensional vector,
with 3 dimensions for position and 4 dimensions for orienta-
tion. For consistency and fair comparison, we follow the origi-
nal training, validation, and test split described in [19].
3.2. Implementation details
For STFT, a window size of 1024 samples and a hop size of 128
samples are used. In both the encoding and decoding stages,
the kernel size, stride, and padding for each convolutional layer
in the upsampling and downsampling processes are set to 4, 2,
and 1, respectively. The model parameters are optimized using
the Adam optimizer [31], and the learning rate is adjusted using
the Cosine Annealing strategy [32]. The hyperparameters in the
loss function are set to 1.0, 0.01, and 0.01, respectively.
3.3. Evaluation metrics
To evaluate the quality of the synthesized binaural audio, both
quantitative and perceptual evaluations are conducted. The
quantitative evaluation metrics include: 1) Wave-L2: The MSE
between the synthesized binaural audio and the ground truth in
the waveform domain; 2) Phase-L2: The MSE in the phase do-
main after applying STFT; 3) Amplitude-L2: The MSE in the
3341
amplitude domain after applying STFT; 4) MRSTFT: Multi-
resolution STFT loss [33]; 5) DILD (dB): The error between
the interaural level difference of the generated binaural audio
and the ground truth [34, 35]; 6) DITD (ms): The error between
the interaural time difference of the generated binaural audio
and the ground truth [34].
The perceptual evaluation metrics include: 1) Mean Opin-
ion Score (MOS): The overall naturalness and fluency of the
binaural audio; 2) Spatialization MOS: The perceived spatial
quality of the binaural audio; 3) Similarity MOS: The per-
ceived similarity between the synthesized binaural audio and
the ground truth.
3.4. Comparison with other methods
We compare our model 1 with several advanced binaural au-
dio synthesis models on the Binaural Speech dataset. Addition-
ally, by incorporating positional information, we also use the
classic WaveNet model [36] for binaural audio synthesis. The
comparison results are shown in Table 1. Although our model
performs somewhat worse in Wave-L2 losses, as mentioned in
[22], Wave-L2 is not a good indicator of binaural audio quality,
since it is computed over both audio channels as a whole. Even
with a lower Wave-L2, the quality of binaural audio may still be
poor. By contrast, human spatial hearing mainly relies on ITD
and ILD, which are widely considered key metrics for evalu-
ating the quality of binaural audio [34]. Moreover, MRSTFT
can better assess the similarity between the synthesized binau-
ral audio and the ground truth. As shown in Table 1, our model
achieves the best performance in MRSTFT, DILD, and DITD,
and ranks second in all other metrics. In addition, we also eval-
uate DSP-based methods. The HRTF dataset we use was col-
lected by MIT [37]. Since the Binaural Speech dataset does not
provide precise room information or HRTFs, the performance
of DSP-based methods is observed to be particularly poor.
Table 1:Comparison with other methods on the Binaural
Speech dataset in quantitative evaluation.
Model Wave-L2↓Phase-L2↓Amplitude-L2↓MRSTFT↓DILD↓DITD↓
DSP 0.626 1.564 0.076 3.085 6.926 5.993
WaveNet [36] 0.188 0.860 0.035 1.683 1.816 0.146
WarpNet [19] 0.1670.8070.048 1.909 3.252 0.073
BinauralGrad [20]0.1280.8370.0301.278 1.600 ‡ 0.035‡
NFS [21] 0.172 0.999 0.035 1.241 ‡ 2.729 0.249
Ours 0.162 ‡ 0.832‡ 0.033‡ 1.174 1.250 0.034
The highest score is highlighted in bold and the second highest score is marked with‡.
For perceptual evaluation, 20 participants are asked to rate
the binaural audio synthesized by each model in terms of nat-
uralness, spatiality, and similarity. The score range is 1-5, and
the higher the score, the better the synthesized audio quality.
The scale is clearly labeled, where 1 represents ”Poor,” 2 indi-
cates ”Fair,” 3 corresponds to ”Neutral,” 4 denotes ”Good,” and
5 signifies ”Excellent.”
Additionally, we use real recorded binaural audio as a
ground truth reference to help participants understand the qual-
ity of an ideal binaural audio sample. Before the formal exper-
iment, all participants go through a familiarization phase. They
first listen to a set of example audio samples and then complete
a trial rating task to ensure they fully understand the evaluation
criteria. The MOS results with 95% confidence are shown in Ta-
ble 2. It can be seen that the model we propose surpasses other
models in all aspects and achieves the best results. For the DSP-
based methods, since a generic HRTF database is used and the
exact room information in Binaural Speech dataset is unknown,
it performs poorly especially in terms of similarity MOS. More-
1Our test demos: https://SpatialAudioDemo.github.io/Spec2Spatial/
over, our method also demonstrates strong performance on bin-
auralization tasks for out-of-distribution audio, such as music
and songs 1.
Table 2:Comparison with other methods on the Binaural
Speech dataset in perceptual evaluation.
Model MOS↑Spatialization MOS↑Similarity MOS↑
DSP 3.71±0.20 3.75±0.31 3.36±0.18
WaveNet [36] 3.67±0.23 3.78±0.29 3.80±0.25
WarpNet [19] 3.92±0.29 3.84±0.23 3.72±0.22
BinauralGrad [20] 4.01±0.27 ‡ 3.99±0.28‡ 4.07±0.18‡
NFS [21] 3.72±0.23 3.68±0.23 3.98±0.30
Ours4.21±0.244.01±0.254.20±0.18
The highest score is highlighted in bold and the second highest score is marked with‡.
Notably, the training dataset we use contains only two hours
of audio, yet it is sufficient to achieve excellent performance.
This shows that even for previously unseen scenarios, accurate
binaural audio synthesis can be achieved with simple training
on a small dataset, highlighting practicality and applicability of
our model in real-world settings.
3.5. Ablation study
To evaluate the impact of each important module, we con-
duct ablation experiment as shown in Table 3.onlyTDW
refers to using time-domain warping alone, which yields the
poorest performance across all metrics, particularly in DILD.
This is because TDW primarily models the delay from sound
to the left and right ears, without affecting ILD, underscor-
ing the necessity of subsequent time–frequency domain pro-
cessing.w/oTDWdenotes removing the time-domain warp-
ing, where the model directly processes the spectral features
of monaural audio, resulting in consistently degraded perfor-
mance.w/oEAMindicates that the EAM is omitted from
the interaural spatial attention network, preventing the model
from effectively capturing inter-channel differences and lead-
ing to inferior performance, especially in DILD.w/oCFRN
represents the exclusion of the CFRN during decoding, where
conditional information is instead directly combined with the
time–frequency features to synthesize binaural audio. This re-
sults in less accurate outputs, particularly in MRSTFT, DILD,
and DITD. Overall, these ablation studies demonstrate the
effectiveness and necessity of each module in our proposed
framework.
Table 3:Ablation experiment results.
Model Wave-L2↓Phase-L2↓Amplitude-L2↓MRSTFT↓DILD↓DITD↓
Spec2Spatial0.162 0.832 0.033 1.174 1.250 0.034
onlyTDW0.410 1.055 0.060 2.154 23.097 0.243
w/oTDW0.258 1.110 0.038 1.273 2.633 0.119
w/oEAM0.169 0.848 ‡ 0.034‡ 1.189‡ 1.403‡ 0.041‡
w/oCFRN0.163 ‡ 0.832 0.033 1.218 1.409 0.117
The highest score is highlighted in bold and the second highest score is marked with‡.
4. Conclusion
This paper proposes a time-frequency spatial attention network
for binaural audio synthesis, which uses the interaural spatial
attention network to learn the relationship between the left and
right ears and applies condition fusion residual network to in-
tegrate the sound source position information with the time-
frequency features, enabling the synthesis of binaural audio
with spatial awareness. Experimental results on the Binaural
Speech dataset show that the proposed network achieves the op-
timal performance in MRSTFT, ILD and ITD, and synthesizes
results most similar to real binaural audio. Future work will
improve cross-dataset generalization using larger binaural data
and broader listening evaluations to enhance binaural quality.
3342
5. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China under Grant No.62276076 and No.62176102,
the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Founda-
tion under Grant No.2023A1515140109, the Shenzhen Higher
Education Institutions Stability Support Program under Grant
No.GXWD20231130133530002, and the Key Research and
Development Program of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region
under Grant No.2025B04037-001.
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
The authors disclose that generative AI tools were 