Towards Efficient Simultaneous Inverse Text Normalization with Pretrained
Text-to-Text Language Model and Read–Tag–Write Policy
Kiet Anh Hoang ID 1,∗,∗∗, Khanh Le ID 1,∗, Bao Nguyen ID 1, Linh Pham ID 1, Dung Vo ID 1,
Thai Tran ID 1, Mai Nguyen1, Tri Nguyen ID 1, Vu Le1
1 UNEY , Switzerland
kiet.ha@uney.com, khanh.ld@uney.com
Abstract
Streaming Inverse Text Normalization (ITN) is vital for
converting spoken-form outputs from streaming Automatic
Speech Recognition into formatted written text. Existing
streaming ITN methods rely on hybrid systems combining neu-
ral tagging with expert-crafted finite-state transducer rules, lim-
iting scalability across domains and languages. While end-
to-end models offer superior scalability by learning directly
from data, standard encoder-decoder architectures are inher-
ently non-streaming due to global attention. In this paper, we
propose an efficient streaming end-to-end ITN system, adapt-
ing a pretrained text-to-text model to leverage its robust linguis-
tic knowledge. To enable streaming, we introduce architectural
adaptations, a specialized training strategy, a Read–Tag–Write
decoding policy, and inference optimizations. Experiments
on Vietnamese datasets show accuracy comparable to non-
streaming baselines, outperforming hybrid methods while sat-
isfying real-time latency requirements.
Index Terms: inverse text normalization, speech recognition,
streaming, end-to-end
1. Introduction
Inverse Text Normalization (ITN) converts spoken-form tran-
scriptions produced by Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR)
systems into readable written-form representations [1]. While
ASR models typically train on verbalized labels to maintain
phonetic alignment with audio, their outputs often lack read-
ability and impair downstream tasks such as machine transla-
tion and natural language understanding. ITN addresses this
by restoring punctuation, applying capitalization, and perform-
ing phrase-level transformations, including semiotic and pho-
netic phrases [2]. For example, it converts expressions like “one
point two dollars” to “$1.20”. While spoken and written forms
are frequently identical, certain structured phrases differ sub-
stantially and require contextual reasoning to resolve ambigui-
ties. This makes ITN inherently context-dependent and neces-
sitates robust contextual representations to ensure accurate dis-
ambiguation across diverse linguistic patterns [3].
Recent advances in ITN have focused on end-to-end ap-
proaches, which achieve strong performance across languages
and domains [1] by implicitly learning patterns from data,
thereby offering greater scalability and enabling effective model
compression [3]. These methods primarily use sequence-to-
sequence (seq2seq) architectures to map spoken-form inputs di-
rectly to written-form outputs [1, 2, 4, 5, 6]. However, standard
seq2seq models often produce unrecoverable hallucination er-
rors, yielding fluent yet semantically incorrect results that alter
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
original meaning [1]. Additionally, processing full sentences
increases computational cost and risks unnecessary changes to
unchanged tokens [2]. Hybrid methods alleviate these problems
by combining neural tagging models with finite-state transducer
(FST) rules [7, 8, 9]. They excel at preserving unmodified
text but depend on expert-crafted FST grammars and extensive
inside-outside-beginning (IOB) tag annotation for each ITN cat-
egory. This dependence limits scalability and performance im-
provement due to the substantial manual effort required for IOB
labeling and FST rule creation [3]. Pretrained language mod-
els [1, 6] and data-driven techniques [5, 10] have also been ex-
plored to address data scarcity, improve generalization, and en-
hance ITN performance across diverse languages and domains.
Despite advances in offline ITN, simultaneous or streaming
ITN remains underexplored yet essential for real-time applica-
tions such as live ASR, meeting transcription, and speech trans-
lation, where formatted text must be displayed instantaneously
to preserve conversational flow. Industrial systems often rely on
cascaded architectures, applying incremental punctuation and
casing models as post-processing steps [7, 8]. While these
modular pipelines provide stability, they struggle with com-
plex semiotic ambiguities that require joint modeling of capi-
talization, punctuation, and structural transformations. Pioneer-
ing work in this area [3] introduced a hybrid streaming solu-
tion employing a chunk-based Transformer [11] tagger to detect
ITN categories in incoming ASR tokens, followed by category-
specific FSTs for targeted conversion. A subsequent study [12]
adapted a pretrained language model with dynamic, context-
aware processing to handle variable ASR chunk sizes and ac-
cumulated tokens, achieving low latency and accuracy compa-
rable to non-streaming ITN on a limited dataset. However, cur-
rent streaming methods rely exclusively on hybrid architectures
and inherit limited scalability due to the need for manual FST
rule development and extensive IOB labeling. While seq2seq
models offer greater scalability, they cannot operate in a stream-
ing fashion because their encoder-decoder architectures rely on
global cross-attention, which prevents incremental processing.
To adapt offline seq2seq models for streaming inference,
the field of Simultaneous Machine Translation (SiMT) has
introduced various techniques to enable incremental process-
ing [13]. A core component of SiMT is the read-write policy,
which decides whether to wait for new source tokens (READ) or
generate target tokens (WRITE) to balance quality and latency.
For instance, the wait-kpolicy [14, 15, 16] enforces a fixed lag
by alternatingWRITE/READoperations after an initialk-token
delay, while monotonic attention mechanisms [17] restrict at-
tention to left-to-right alignments. Other adaptive strategies in-
volve learned thresholds for dynamic read-write decisions [18],
Hidden Markov Transformers for simultaneous generation [19],
or leveraging large language models as policy-makers [20].
660
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1060
Figure 1:Overview of the proposed streaming end-to-end ITN framework using the Read–Tag–Write policy. The streaming encoder
utilizes Dynamic Right Context masking to process incoming chunks of spoken-form tokens, while a joint tagger predicts{B, I, O}
labels. Verbatim tokens (O) are passed through instantly to minimize latency. Upon the completion of a normalization span, the
autoregressive decoder is selectively triggered, generating normalized text by cross-attending to the relevant encoder hidden states
(H0:m) and conditioning on the written-form prefixˆypre.
However, while effective for translation, these strategies intro-
duce redundant computation for ITN. In SiMT, the reordering
problem represents a primary conflict between translation qual-
ity and real-time latency. Unlike SiMT, which requires global
structural restructuring, ITN is characterized by local transfor-
mations that maintain the original word order. Because ASR
outputs are largely verbatim, the fixed lags and generative over-
head typical of SiMT policies may be counterproductive for
ITN. Consequently, the applicability of complex SiMT schedul-
ing to the localized domain of ITN remains unexplored.
In this paper, we propose, to the best of our knowledge, the
first streaming end-to-end ITN model. Our approach achieves
accuracy comparable to non-streaming end-to-end baselines,
outperforms streaming hybrid methods, and eliminates the need
for manual FST rules and IOB labeling. Our experiments are
conducted on Vietnamese, a challenging language for ITN due
to its complex morphological nuances and frequent phonetic
borrowing. By relying strictly on standard text-to-text foun-
dations rather than language-specific heuristics, our approach
ensures cross-linguistic generalization and is compatible with
any seq2seq architecture. Our main contributions include:
•A recipe for making pretrained seq2seq models truly
streamable:We present a practical set of techniques: archi-
tectural changes, a streaming-aware multi-task objective, and
a novel data augmentation technique. That together enable
end-to-end ITN with strict left-to-right processing.
•An efficient Read–Tag–Write decoding policy with KV
Caching and Copy–Paste Strategy:We introduce a si-
multaneous inference procedure that (i) passes through non-
normalized tokens with minimal delay and (ii) triggers gen-
eration only upon completing a normalization span, further
accelerated by KV caching and a Copy–Paste strategy that
keeps historical context and removes redundant computation.
•Comprehensive empirical evaluation:We rigorously eval-
uate our approach on a newly curated 5M-sentence Viet-
namese dataset featuring automated alignments and bound-
ary tags, verifying its highly efficient performance.
2. Streaming End-to-End Inverse
Text Normalization
In this section, we explain the chosen pretrained text-to-text
models and describe our proposed framework for streaming
end-to-end ITN.
2.1. Pretrained Text-to-Text Models
Pretrained text-to-text models such as BART [21] and T5 [22]
have advanced seq2seq learning by unifying diverse NLP tasks
under a generative framework. Unlike encoder-only architec-
tures, these models utilize a complete Transformer encoder-
decoder structure where both inputs and outputs are represented
as text strings. BART [21] is pretrained using a denoising ob-
jective including token masking, deletion, and sentence permu-
tation to learn robust bidirectional encoder representations and
autoregressive decoder capabilities. Similarly, T5 [22] employs
a span-corruption objective on the Colossal Clean Crawled Cor-
pus (C4), facilitating effective transfer learning for downstream
tasks such as translation and summarization. Extensive empir-
ical evidence indicates that leveraging these pretrained founda-
tions significantly improves performance on downstream tasks
compared to training from scratch, especially in low-resource
or domain-specific scenarios [21, 22, 23].
For the Vietnamese language, EnViT51 [24] adapts the T5-
base architecture to a bilingual setting. Following the standard
configuration, the model features 12 layers in both the encoder
and decoder, a hidden dimension of 768, 12 attention heads,
and a gated-GELU feed-forward projection with an intermedi-
ate dimension of 2048, totaling approximately 275 million pa-
rameters. EnViT5 was pretrained on a massive bilingual corpus,
including an 80GB filtered subset of CC100 [25], using a 15%
span-corruption objective for both English and Vietnamese. It
utilizes a shared SentencePiece tokenizer [26] with a 50,048-
subword vocabulary specifically optimized for the morphologi-
cal nuances of the Vietnamese language. EnViT5 achieves su-
1https://huggingface.co/VietAI/envit5-base
661
perior performance on Vietnamese-English translation tasks on
the PhoMT benchmark [27], outperforming larger models such
as mBART [24]. Given its superior semantic alignment and
generative efficiency, we adopt EnViT5 as the foundation for
our end-to-end ITN system, subsequently adapting the architec-
ture to satisfy streaming requirements.
2.2. Model Architecture
The proposed streaming end-to-end ITN model, illustrated in
Fig. 1, is built upon the pretrained EnViT5 architecture. It com-
prises a streaming-capable encoder and an autoregressive de-
coder, optimized for real-time inverse text normalization.
2.2.1. Streaming Encoder with Joint Tagger
To support streaming inference within the encoder, we employ
the Dynamic Right Context (DRC) masking technique [28] dur-
ing training. Specifically, we utilize an attention mask to in-
corporate variable chunk sizes and dynamic look-ahead while
maintaining access to the full historical left context. By varying
these parameters during training, the masking strategy effec-
tively simulates the restricted future context inherent in real-
time processing, ensuring robustness to diverse latency con-
straints during inference.
For an input sequenceX={x 0,...,x n−1}, the encoder
generates hidden representationsH∈R n×d through Trans-
former layers constrained by the DRC mask, whereddenotes
the hidden dimensionality of the model. A linear tagging layer
(the Tagger module as illustrated in Fig. 1), is integrated atop
these hidden representations to facilitate on-the-fly detection of
normalization spans (e.g., punctuation, capitalization, or numer-
ical expressions). Following [2], the tagger classifies each to-
kenx i using a{B, I, O}(Beginning, Inside, Outside) labeling
scheme. The predicted tag ˆti is determined by:
ˆti =argmax(H iWtag), W tag∈R d×3 (1)
These predicted tags serve as the control signals for the
Read–Tag–Write policy (described in Section 2.3). Unlike hy-
brid approaches [3, 12] that require fine-grained tags for various
ITN categories to trigger specific FST rules, our tagger utilizes
only 3 classes. This reduced label space simplifies classification
and leads to more robust span detection compared to complex
multi-class systems.
2.2.2. Autoregressive Decoder and Training Objective
During training, the decoder generates written-form tokensy t
by cross-attending to the encoder representationsH, condi-
tioned on the ground-truth previous tokensy <t. While the en-
coder is constrained for streaming, the decoder maintains its
standard autoregressive structure. The probability distribution
over the vocabulary at each step is computed as:
P(y t|y<t,H) =softmax(e tW⊤
f f n)(2)
wheree t∈R d is the decoder hidden state at stept,W f f n∈
RV×d is the vocabulary projection matrix, andVdenotes the
vocabulary size.
The model is optimized using a multi-task objective. We
defineL tag as the cross-entropy loss for span detection and
Lgen as the sequence generation loss:
Ltag =− 1PB
b=1Nb
BX
b=1
NbX
i=1
logP(t b,i|x b,i)(3)
Lgen =− 1PB
b=1Tb
BX
b=1
TbX
t=1
logP(y b,t|y b,<t,H b)(4)
Here,Bdenotes the batch size, whileN b andT b represent the
source and target sequence lengths for theb-th sample, respec-
tively. The termst b,i andy b,t denote the ground-truth tag at step
iand the target token at stept. The probabilityP(t b,i|x b,i)
is computed by applying the softmax function to the tagger log-
itsH b,iWtag.
The overall objective is a combination of these components:
L=L tag +L gen (5)
2.3. Read–Tag–Write Policy
To enable efficient streaming inference, we propose the
Read–Tag–Write (RTW) policy. Unlike SiMT policies that
manage global structural reordering [13], RTW exploits the lo-
cal, order-preserving nature of ITN to coordinate the interaction
between the streaming encoder and the autoregressive decoder,
ensuring that generative normalization occurs only when neces-
sary. The policy operates in three distinct phases:
1.Read:The system receives incoming ASR tokens in discrete
chunks. LetC k ={x i,...,x i+c−1}be thek-th chunk of
sizec. The encoder, constrained by the DRC mask, pro-
cessesC k by leveraging the cached historical context and a
limited look-ahead ofrtokens to compute hidden represen-
tationsH i:i+c−1, which are appended to the global hidden
state sequenceH 0:i+c−1.
2.Tag:A joint tagging layer performs token-level classifi-
cation on the hidden states of the newly arrived chunk.
For each tokenx j ∈C k, the model predicts a tag ˆtj ∈
{B,I,O}as:
ˆtj =argmax(H jWtag)(6)
The policy identifies transformation spans using{B,I}la-
bels. A span (e.g., a singleBor aB-Isequence) is con-
sidered complete only when the tagger encounters a tag
ˆtj+1 ∈{B,O}or a sentence boundary. If ˆtj+1 =I, the
token is treated as a continuation of the current span and the
system continues to “Read” without triggering the “Write”
phase.
3.Write:Unlike standard seq2seq models that decode the en-
tire sequence, the RTW policy invokes the decoder selec-
tively based on predicted tags:
•Verbatim Pass-through:For tokens tagged asO, the sys-
tem directly emits the spoken-form token. This ensures
minimal latency and preserves the integrity of verbatim
segments by bypassing the generative decoder.
•Selective Decoding:When aB−Ispan (or a se-
quence of consecutive spans) is completed, the decoder
is triggered. To optimize throughput, multiple consecu-
tive spans within a chunk are concatenated and processed
in a single decoder invocation. Letmbe the index of the
final token in the last completed span. The decoder gen-
erates the written-form segmentˆylocal by cross-attending
to the encoder hidden statesH 0:m:
P(ˆylocal|ˆypre,H 0:m) =
UY
u=1
P(y u|[ˆypre;y <u],H 0:m)
(7)
662
where[·;·]denotes the concatenation operator,ˆypre repre-
sents the written-form prefix generated in previous steps,
andy u is theu-th token of the local sequence of lengthU.
Crucially, cross-attention is restricted toH 0:m, ensuring
look-ahead context does not influence the current transfor-
mation. This constraint prevents the decoder from over-
generating or emitting extraneous tokens beyond the tar-
get span. The decoder generates tokens until an<EOS>
token is predicted, signaling the end of the local transfor-
mation. To prevent infinite decoding loops in edge cases
where the model fails to emit an<EOS>token, we im-
plement a forced hard-stop that truncates generation at a
maximum ofL max local tokens per local span.
2.4. Inference Optimization via Copy–Paste Strategy and
KV Caching
Encoder KV Caching:To maximize efficiency, we implement
an incremental Key-Value (KV) cache for the encoder, enabling
the reuse of computations from previous chunks. Similarly,
we cache the encoder hidden states and the previously decoded
written-form prefix. When the decoder is triggered, the entire
cross-attention and self-attention KV states need to be updated
to incorporate the newly computed encoder states. We perform
an initial single batched forward pass through the decoder to
populate the self-attention and cross-attention KV caches using
the existing prefix, bypassing the need for autoregressive decod-
ing during this initialization phase. Subsequent tokens are then
produced via standard autoregressive generation. These opti-
mizations significantly improve inference throughput and mini-
mize latency.
Copy–Paste Strategy:In contrast to [2], which completely ex-
cludes historical context from the autoregressive decoder, we ar-
gue that such context is vital for accurate normalization. Since
spoken and written forms are frequently identical in ITN, the
Otag is the most prevalent. Our RTW policy leverages this
by bypassing the decoder for these tokens and copying them
directly to the output. Crucially, these skipped tokens are still
incorporated into the historical context to guide the decoding of
B−Itokens. This approach not only reduces computational
overhead and mitigates hallucinations in verbatim segments but
also allows the decoder to maintain the full historical context
efficiently.
Decoder KV Caching:To mitigate the computational overhead
inherent in the Copy–Paste mechanism and autoregressive de-
coding, where standard processing would redundantly recom-
pute the entire history for both copied and emitted tokens, we
implement the “fully streaming” version by enabling the de-
coder KV Caching for both self- and cross-attention. This al-
lows the model to reuse states from previous invocations and
perform updates only for new tokens. While this eliminates ini-
tial passes, it introduces a training-inference mismatch: training
uses the full target prefix, whereas streaming inference updates
states incrementally without re-attending to past tokens under
new encoder states. Our experiments show this results in only a
marginal performance fluctuation compared to the first strategy.
2.5. Prefix-based Training Augmentation
The RTW policy requires the decoder to emit an<EOS>
token to terminate each local normalization span. Standard
training, however, typically conditions<EOS>prediction on
a global source-side boundary. This creates a train-test mis-
match during streaming inference, where local spans must ter-
minate without observing a global<EOS>or future context.
Algorithm 1Prefix-based Training Augmentation
Require:Training pair(x 0:N−1,y 0:M−1 ), probabilityp trunc
1:r∼Uniform(0,1)
2:ifr<p trunc then
{Truncated case}
3:Samplek∼Uniform{1,...,N−1}
4:x ′←x 0:k−1{No source-side<EOS>}
5:y ′←[y 0:l−1;<EOS>]{y 0:l−1 is the target aligned with
x0:k−1}
6:else
{Full-sequence case}
7:x ′←[x 0:N−1 ;<EOS>]
8:y ′←[y 0:M−1 ;<EOS>]
9:end if
10:return(x ′,y′)
Simply appending an<EOS>token to source chunks during in-
ference is unsuitable, as it would invalidate the incremental KV
cache through self- and cross-attention and exacerbate distribu-
tion shifts.
To bridge this train-test discrepancy, we introducePrefix-
based Training Augmentation(Alg. 1), a computationally ef-
ficient method applied on-the-fly during training. We stochas-
tically truncate training examples in an aligned manner with a
probabilityp trunc. In these instances, the source-side<EOS>
is omitted, while the target-side prefix is explicitly terminated
with an<EOS>token. This strategy compels the model to learn
that any valid completion of a normalization span, even when
occurring mid-sentence, must trigger termination based solely
on the current partial encoder hidden states. By simulating these
artificial boundaries, the model becomes robust to the truncated
inputs encountered during streaming inference. Consequently,
the decoder can reliably terminate generation without compro-
mising the incremental KV cache, ensuring the system remains
responsive to subsequent incoming chunks.
2.6. Data Construction
We construct our dataset from thebinhvq 2 news corpus, a
large-scale collection containing approximately 6 billion words
across diverse domains. Using the proposed data generation
pipeline, we produce 5M training sentence pairs, 50k validation
pairs, and 50k test pairs. In addition to spoken-written text pairs,
the dataset provides deterministic phrase-level alignments be-
tween spoken-form inputs and written-form targets, as well as
token-level normalization boundary annotations. For span de-
tection, each token is labeled using the IOB tagging scheme to
identify segments requiring normalization. These spans encom-
pass the entire affected word. For instance, a trailing punctua-
tion mark is grouped within the preceding word’s span. These
annotations facilitate both prefix-based training augmentation
and auxiliary tagging supervision.
Categories: We define a comprehensive set of ITN categories
that reflect common phenomena in ASR outputs. These cat-
egories include punctuation restoration, capitalization, semi-
otic normalization, and phonetic normalization. For punctua-
tion restoration, we consider four standard punctuation marks:
comma, period, question mark, and exclamation mark [12].
Semiotic normalization covers entities such as numbers, dates,
times, fractions, currencies, digit sequences, and electronic ad-
dresses, while phonetic normalization targets out-of-vocabulary
2https://github.com/binhvq/news-corpus
663
(OOV) expressions, including foreign words, named entities,
domain names, and letter sequences.
Pipeline: The dataset is generated through an automated data
generation pipeline that builds upon the data preparation frame-
work introduced in [2], with substantial extensions to support a
broader range of ITN categories. Specifically, we define a com-
prehensive set of regular expressions (regex) to identify normal-
ization regions in written-form text:
•Capitalization and punctuation restoration:Spoken-form
inputs are generated by removing all punctuation marks and
converting the text to lowercase.
•Semiotic normalization:Each class (e.g., cardinal/ordinal
numbers, decimals, currencies, time expressions, and fac-
tions) is identified using dedicated regex patterns. Since
these expressions are 