Deep learning–based predictions of perceived listening effort and intelligibility
across enhanced, synthetic, natural, and binaural speech
Dirk Eike Hoffner ID 1,2,∗, Hartmut Schoon ID 1,2,∗, Rainer Huber ID 1,3, Jan Rennies ID 2,3, Bernd T.
Meyer ID 1,2
1 Communications Acoustics, Carl von Ossietzky Universit¨at Oldenburg, Germany
2 Cluster of Excellence Hearing4all, Carl von Ossietzky Universit¨at Oldenburg, Germany
3 Fraunhofer Institute for Digital Media Technology IDMT, Branch Hearing, Speech and Audio
Technology HSA, Oldenburg, Germany
dirk.eike.hoffner@uol.de, hartmut.schoon@uol.de,rainer.huber@uol.de,
jan.rennies-hochmuth@idmt.fraunhofer.de, bernd.meyer@uol.de
Abstract
Models of auditory perception that accurately predict subjec-
tive listening effort (LE) and speech intelligibility (SI) are im-
portant tools in hearing research. In this paper, we analyze the
predictive power of two deep-learning models for a wide range
of tasks, which cover speech enhancement in hearing aids, per-
ception in binaural scenes, as well as synthetic speech. The
PHOne-based Binaural Intelligibility model (PHOBI) is based
on phone posteriors obtained from a deep neural net trained
as part of speech recognizer, while HASANet+ is a teacher-
student model trained to mimic intrusive measures of SI. We
analyze over 10,500 LE and SI ratings collected from 39 listen-
ers and find that both models produce high correlations between
measurement and prediction over 0.88, which included LE met-
rics for which the models were not explicitly designed. While
PHOBI produces slightly better results on average, both mod-
els seem to be applicable to conditions that are not covered in
training.
Index Terms: speech perception model, speech intelligibility,
listening effort, non-intrusive, deep neural network
1. Introduction
The perception of speech plays a central role in human com-
munication; it can be quantified with metrics such as the per-
ceived listening effort (LE) or speech intelligibility (SI), i.e.,
the percentage of words recognized from an utterance. Listen-
ing tests are the gold standard to measure these metrics, but
they are time-consuming and hence, accurate models of speech
perception that predict LE and SI are desirable. Optimally,
such models should be able to predict the effects in regular
acoustic conditions (i.e., for spatial and monaural signals) and
in digital communication, for instance, synthetic versus natu-
ral speech or enhanced versus unprocessed signals. Percep-
tion models can be categorized into two classes: Intrusive ap-
proaches depend on a clean reference signal provided alongside
the noisy/processed signal, whereas non-intrusive models can
make predictions solely from the noisy/processed signal. SI was
successfully predicted through multiple intrusive measures: the
Speech Intelligibility Index (SII) [1], the short-time objective
intelligibility measure (STOI) [2], its extended version ESTOI,
[3], or the Hearing-Aid Speech Perception Index (HASPI) [4].
Non-intrusive models can potentially be applied in real-
world scenearios. For instance, the non-intrusive STOI (niS-
*These authors contributed equally.
TOI) [5] estimates the envelope of clean speech using a statis-
tical model. A blind Discriminative Speech Intelligibility Pre-
dictor (DISP) based on a hybrid ASR system was introduced
in[6] for microscopic (word-level) prediction of human percep-
tion. Among several candidate measures, the dispersion of ASR
posterior probabilities for competing words, given the obser-
vation sequence, was shown to map effectively to intelligibil-
ity scores. Their evaluation focused on noisy monaural signals
with normal-hearing listeners. Tu et al. proposed a blind end-
to-end (E2E) ASR-based framework for speech intelligibility
prediction, deriving uncertainty measures from different stages
of a transformer-based recognizer [7]. On average, information
from the decoding stage yielded the best predictions Clarity Pre-
diction data [8]. In another E2E variant, uncertainty was esti-
mated across an ensemble of six transformer-based ASR models
and related to SI scores from listening experiments [9].
In this paper, we analyze two recent SI models based on deep
learning, both for SI and LE prediction, which were cho-
sen since they are based on different principles for prediction:
The phone-based binaural intelligiblity model (PHOBI) [10] is
based on a neural network, trained as part of a regular speech
recognizer, which produces phone posteriors. The degradation
of posteriors in the presence of noise or other factors is quan-
tified with an entropy-based measure that servers as proxy for
predictions. HASA-Net+ [11] is a model trained in a teacher-
student approach for the reference-free prediction of HASPI as
well as the Hearing-Aid Speech Quality Index (HASQI) [12].
In challenging conditions, SI may still be very high, but it re-
quires lots of effort to follow conversations, and LE as a met-
ric becomes important. Huber et al. [13] proposed the LEAP
model (listening effort estimation from acoustic parameters),
which is also based on phone posteriors obtained from a deep
neural network (DNN), but this paper only analyzed LE pre-
dictions. Since SI and LE are related (i.e., both are affected
by acoustic degradations), the question arises of whether cur-
rent perception models can be applied to predict both metrics.
It was shown in [14] that this is possible in principle, however,
the study only included natural, unprocessed speech of a single
talker. The aim of the current study is to evaluate predictions
with PHOBI and HASA-Net+ for SI in spatial scenes, in which
binaural release from masking is important for listeners, and for
subjective LE prediction with and without speech enhancement
and for speech stimuli generated with text-to-speech. Our anal-
ysis takes into account over 10,500 responses collected from 39
participants in listening experiments.
734
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1891
2. Methods
2.1. Phone-based model
PHOBI was trained as a hybrid automatic speech recognition
(ASR) system with a feed-forward neural network (FFNN) and
a hidden Markov model (HMM). While the FFNN estimates
triphone probabilities for each time frame of the input signal,
the HMM stage uses these estimates to generate a transcription.
After ASR training, the HMM stage was discarded because
PHOBI’s predictions are based solely on the triphone’s predic-
tion uncertainty. For training, the LibriSpeech corpus [15] was
used, containing 960h of speech from English audiobooks. The
training data was further augmented by adding noise, applying
different hearing-aid algorithms, and adding spatial information
through acoustic room simulations. For clear input speech, the
FFNN will usually produce distinct triphone estimates, i.e., the
triphone posterior probabilities will reflect activations of sin-
gle triphones. In the presence of additional noise, predictions
become less distinct, resulting in smeared probability distribu-
tions. This effect can be measured using the Mean Temporal
Distance (MTD) [16], which calculates the average Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence over all possible triphone distribution
pairs separated by a fixed time-lag.
2.2. Teacher-student model
HASA-Net+ is a deep learning framework trained for the
reference-free prediction of the speech perception measures
HASPI and HASQI, based on a teacher-student approach. The
system utilizes speech representations generated by the pre-
trained WavLM-Large foundation model, which processes raw
audio waveforms to extract useful features for deep learning
tasks. These are combined with hearing-loss patterns extracted
from processed audiograms via a dense layer, then fed to a
Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (BLSTM) stage. The
output of the BSLSTM stages is passed to two separate multi-
head attention branches trained for the prediction of HASPI or
HASQI. As training data, the VCTK-DEMAND [17] and the
TIMIT [18] corpora were used, which combined contain speech
from > 700 native British and American English speakers. The
training data was augmented by adding noise and reverberation,
and by applying speech-enhancing algorithms, dereverberation
models, and a speech vocoder. In this study, only the HASPI
prediction of HASA-Net+ was used since one task involved SI
prediction and speech quality was not considered, i.e., HASA-
Net+ always refers to the HASPI component.
2.3. Datasets
2.3.1. Spatial speech intelligibility
Beutelmann and Brand [19] conducted SI measurements with 8
normal-hearing participants, which we refer to as SI spatial. For
each participant, multiple speech intelligibility measurements
were performed, using speech and noise recordings from the
Oldenburg Sentence Test OLSA [20], Each sentence followed
the same structure:<name> <verb> <numeral> <adjective>
<object>. Stationary, speech-shaped noise (SSN) with the
same long-term spectrum as the speech was added to the sen-
tences with varying signal-to-noise ratios (SNR), and partici-
pants were asked to repeat the presented speech. The SNR was
modified via an adaptive procedure [21] so that it reached the
speech recognition threshold (SRT), i.e., the SNR at which 50%
of the presented words were repeated correctly. Head-related
transfer functions (HRTFs) were used to simulate three differ-
ent acoustic environments: anechoic, office, and cafeteria. In
this acoustic environment, speech and noise could be separated.
While speech was always presented from the front (azimuth 0°),
noise was presented from multiple angles, ranging from -180 °
to 180°. Note that PHOBI predictions with this dataset have
been reported in [10], but with a rather complex binaural inte-
gration stage (instead of better-ear listening used in this paper).
2.3.2. Listening effort of enhanced speech
Pusch et al. [22] investigated LE improvements by enhancing
noisy speech with an adaptive dynamic range compression al-
gorithm (AdaptDRC) [23] based on listening experiments. The
algorithm divides the input signal into 8 octave bands and com-
putes a slightly modified version of the speech intelligibility
index (SII) for each subband. In a first amplification stage,
the energy is redistributed across frequency bands, shifting en-
ergy from low-frequency bands to high-frequency bands be-
cause those are generally more relevant for SI. The degree of
frequency redistribution is controlled by the SII estimates. As
a second step, each sub-band is processed by a compressor that
applies stronger compression to less intelligible bands, while
intelligible ones are less altered. Eleven normal-hearing listen-
ers participated in listening experiments, which used LE and
SI as target measures. The OLSA sentences were presented
in speech shaped stationary (SSN) and non-stationary cafete-
ria noise (CAF), which includes different background talkers.
The SRT was measured using the adaptive procedure outlined
above for both noise variants. In one condition, the AdaptDRC
algorithm was applied to the mixed OLSA signals to investigate
its effects. In the LE experiments, processed and unprocessed
OLSA sentences were presented to participants who were asked
to rate their perceived LE on a scale proposed by Krueger et al.
[24], ranging from ”no effort” - 1 ESCU (Effort Scaling Cate-
gorical Unit) to ”extremely effortful” - 13 ESCU. An extra cat-
egory 14 ESCU could be selected if the presented speech could
not be heard by the participant. This dataset will be referenced
with LEenhanced.
2.3.3. Listening effort of synthetic speech
In this dataset introduced by Huber et al. [25], LE of syn-
thetic speech under realistic noise conditions was investigated.
It is referred to as LE synthetic. A Google text-to-speech system
with male and female voices was used to synthesize four ut-
terances for each voice. Each utterance was composed of two
German sentences with a content following ITU-T Recommen-
dation P501 [26]. Reverberation with a reverberation timeRT60
of 0.54s as well as noise from one of five noise types at indi-
vidual SNRs: cocktail party (at -12dB SNR), factory (-4 dB),
angle grinder (-12 dB), train interior (2 dB), sink (7 dB). Head-
related impulse responses (HRIR) from [27] were used to spa-
tialize the speech (S) and noise (N) to generate following setups:
S0Ndiffuse, S0N0, S0N90, S45Ndiffuse, S45N45, S45N135. For
the diffuse noise, original noise recordings were used without
convolving them with HRIRs. In total, 240 stimuli were gener-
ated. These stimuli were presented to 23 (13 female / 10 male)
normal-hearing participants, who rated the subjective listening
effort for each stimulus. LE was again rated on the same scale
(1 ESCU to 14 ESCU) as in the LEenhanced dataset.
2.4. Mapping of model outputs to LE and SI
Since neither PHOBI nor HASA-Net+ directly predict LE, we
created a mapping function from model output to LE values. To
735
this end, an independent dataset was evaluated, where each lis-
tener scored LE of ten sentences of the G¨ottinger Sentence Test
in 80 different conditions. Conditions contain gradual modifica-
tions of speech by changing the speed, pitch, applying low-pass
and high-pass filter, adding noise, reverberation or using a voice
changer. We determined linear fits between predicted average
LE of the 80 conditions and the corresponding subjective LE
ratings for both models and both LE datasets analyzed in this
study. The target value for our SI data is the SRT, which was
obtained by sampling the psychometric function of the models,
i.e., we determined the model outputs in each condition by mix-
ing ten speech signals with noise ranging from -40 to 20 dB
in steps of 0.5 dB. A sigmoid psychometric function was fitted
to this data and the SNR with 50% intelligibility was used as
SRT. To predict binaural SI for each condition (speaker in front,
noise at condition-specific azimuth), we used the head-related
transfer functions from the SI spatial dataset to create a left and a
right channel, which are individually processed by the models.
A better-ear listening strategy was used by simply selecting the
higher numerical output for each model. In related work, a con-
stant offset was observed for the PHOBI SRT prediction, which
was corrected with a single reference condition. In this study,
we learned this correction offset from the condition Anechoic,
S0N 0, where speech and noise are co-located at 0° azimuth.
For a fair comparison, we performed the same correction for
HASA-Net+ and report both scores for this model, corrected
and uncorrected.
3. Results
3.1. Spatial speech intelligibility
Figure 1 shows the results for the SRT prediction of the SIspatial
dataset for both examined models. Human performance (shown
in light grey) is heavily influenced by the location of the noise:
It is worst (highest) for co-located speech and noise (at 0°) and
gets better (the SRT drops) as the noise is moved to differ-
ent angles through spatial release from masking. Both mod-
els, the PHOBI and HASA-Net+ models, achieve high corre-
lations between predicted and subjective SRTs. The Pearson
correlation coefficient is highest for both models in the ane-
choic room, with values of 0.97 and 0.94, respectively. The
RMSE is 1.0 dB (PHOBI) and 1.8 dB / 4.5 db (HASA-Net+ cor-
rected/uncorrected) For all three room conditions, the PHOBI
model outperforms the HASA-Net+ model with respect to cor-
relation. The performance in terms of correlation decreases
if reverberant rooms are considered (Office: r = 0.91 / 0.88
(PHOBI / HASA-Net+); Cafeteria: r = 0.94 / 0.91) and an in-
crease in RMSE (Office: 2.3 dB / 4.5 dB / 1.3 dB; Cafeteria:
1.6 dB / 2.7 dB / 3.2 dB for PHOBI and HASA-Net+ (cor-
rected/uncorrected), respectively.) On average, the RMSEs of
the HASA-Net+ predictions are 1.4 dB higher than the RMSEs
of the PHOBI predictions, regardless of whether the corrected
or uncorrected data is used for HASA-Net+.
3.2. Listening effort of enhanced speech
Figure 2 (a & b) shows average LE predictions for the LEenhanced
dataset obtained from HASA-Net+ and PHOBI. Each marker in
each subplot corresponds to the mean value of the respective
metric over sentences presented at a specific SNR and noise
type. The different patterns within the markers indicate the
SNR; the different types of markers indicate the specific noise
condition and whether the sentences are unprocessed or pro-
cessed. For both models, the overall relationship between sub-
jective LE and the metric score is a linear correlation with a
coefficient of r = 0.98 (HASA-Net+) and r = 0.94 (PHOBI),
respectively. Markers representing unprocessed and processed
signals of the same SNR are connected, indicated by a small
arrow pointing from the unprocessed to the processed condi-
tion. For the PHOBI predictions, it can be seen that for all
pairs except for two, the arrows point from the upper right to
the lower left, indicating a reduction in both measured and pre-
dicted listening effort due to a successful speech enhancement.
In contrast, for the cafeteria noise at -10 and -15 dB SNR, the
predicted LE values increase, while the measured subjective LE
values decrease. The same behavior is observed for HASA-
Net+ predictions. The predictions of PHOBI are closer to the
subjective LE with an RMSE of 1.2 ESCU (HASA-Net+: 1.9
ESCU).
3.3. Listening effort of synthetic speech
Figure 2 (panels c and d) show subjective LE ratings plot-
ted over the corresponding model predictions for the LE synthetic
dataset. Five different background noise conditions (w.r.t. noise
type and SNR) are shown, indicated by different gray scales.
For each noise condition, there are 12 data points, each repre-
sented by one of six marker types, corresponding to different
spatial configurations. Each spatial configuration is represented
by two talkers (male/female). Both models achieve high cor-
relation values, r = 0.94 and 0.96, respectively, if the complete
data are considered altogether. Within the noise-specific data
subsets, correlations are lower and vary strongly between noise
types. (HASA-Net+: r = 0.59, 0.75, 0.43, 0.50, 0.71) (PHOBI:
r = 0.79, 0.89, 0.62, 0.81, 0.91) (order of noise types as given in
the legend of Figure 2 panel c).
4. Discussion
4.1. Spatial speech intelligibility
The results show that both models can accurately predict SI
and model the effect of a spatial release from masking observed
in human listeners based on simple better ear listening (BTL).
PHOBI uses an offset correction based on a single condition
(similar to [10]). HASA-Net+ (with and without offset correc-
tion) produces slightly higher RMSE values than PHOBI. In
contrast to the monophones and complex binaural integration
stage used by [10], our model relies on triphone activations and
BTL at its core. To compare our results with SIspatial to the liter-
ature, we repeated the experiments using monophones but keep-
ing the BTL strategy. When comparing these values to [10], it
can be seen that, for the anechoic condition, the correlation is
1.0 with binaural integration and therefore higher than for BTL
(r = 0.97). The difference is smaller for the presented rooms
(Cafeteria: r = 0.95 with binaural integration, r = 0.94 with
BTL) and even changes sign for the office condition, where the
correlation is higher with BTL (Office: r = 0.86 with binaural
integration, r = 0.88 with BTL). This leaves room for binaural
integration that captures the effect of room acoustics across a
range of acoustic scenes. The same can be done for the HASA-
Net+ model. It does not capture the effect of room acoustics
as well as the PHOBI model does. Especially when the presen-
tation angles are located to the left of the listener, the model’s
predictions degrade. While we also use BTL for HASA-Net+,
it remains to be seen whether this trend is also visible when
employing binaural integration for the HASA-Net+.
736
Figure 1: Spatial intelligibility predictions of HASA-Net+ (darker diamonds) and PHOBI (black dots) for the SI spatial dataset. The
subjective human data is shown for comparison as light grey squares.
4.2. Listening effort of enhanced speech
Both models can predict listening effort in the non-spatial
scenes analyzed in this study (HASA-Net+: r = 0.98; PHOBI:
r = 0.94). Applying the speech enhancement algorithm to the
signals lowers LE; this is also reflected by the model predic-
tions, indicated by arrows pointing down and to the left in Fig-
ure 1 (left panels).
A linear relation between subjective LE ratings and model
predictions is observed across most items; however, PHOBI
model predictions for cafeteria noise show a ceiling behavior
at negative SNRs/high LEs. This might be explained by the fact
that the cafeteria noise contains glimpses of speech which are
rated with lower-than-maximum LE scale values by the model,
which cannot differentiate between target speech and interfer-
ing speech.
4.3. Listening effort of synthetic speech
PHOBI and HASA-Net+ produce high correlation values
for the LE synthetic dataset as well, which suggests a similar
predictive power for synthetic speech as for natural speech.
This indicates strong generalization across different rooms
and angles of speech and noise presentation. The predictions
for each of the five noise conditions are clustered, indicating
an absolute difference in the model’s output values. The
correlation values for both models within a cluster (i.e., a
specific noise type) are smaller than the overall correlation:
The intra-cluster correlations range from r = 0.43 to r = 0.75
for HASA-Net+ predictions and from r = 0.62 to r = 0.91 for
PHOBI predictions, indicating higher predictive power for the
PHOBI model in specific noise conditions. We assume that the
comparatively low correlation values (in contrast to the global
correlation) are mostly due to the small spread of subjective
ratings within each cluster.
5. Summary
In this paper, we analyzed the predictive power of two current
models of auditory perception for SI predictions in binaural
scenes and LE predictions across various acoustic conditions,
with both natural and synthesized speech. SI predictions in spa-
tial scenes were consistently high, and both models accurately
predicted the LE reduction when an enhancement algorithm,
similar to enhancement in hearing aids, was applied across two
noise types and various SNRs. Consistent LE predictions were
also observed for synthetic speech in spatial scenes, which indi-
cates that both deep-learning approaches (PHOBI and HASA-
Net+) generalize to acoustic tasks which were not implicitly
covered in training.
Figure 2: (a & b ): Predictions for the LEenhanced dataset of HASA-Net+ (a) and PHOBI (b) for different noise types (legend a [proc *:
processed version of noise (caf: cafeteria noise, ssn: speech shaped noise); unproc *: unprocessed version of noise]) and different
SNRs (legend b). Arrows connect the unprocessed and processed version of the same signals. (c & d): Predictions for the LE synthetic
dataset of HASA-Net+ (c) and PHOBI (d) for different background noise conditions (legend c) and different speech (S) and noise (N)
directions. Dashed line: linear regression line; grey shaded area: 95% confidence interval
737
6. Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s
Excellence Strategy – EXC 2177/2- Project ID 390895286.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
The authors used Grammarly Proofreader for grammar check-
ing and linguistic refinement to improve the clarity and flow of
the manuscript. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and
edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the
final version of the paper.