Plan and Double-Check:
Streaming Multimodal Q-Former for Online Robot Action Generation
Chiori Hori ID 1,∗∗, Ryosuke Korekata ID 1,2, Motonari Kambara ID 1,2, Yoshiki Masuyama ID 1,
Siddarth Jain ID 1, Radu Corcodel ID 1, Diego Romeres ID 1, Jonathan Le Roux ID 1
1 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, MA, USA
2 Keio University, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan
{chori, masuyama, leroux}@merl.com
Abstract
Integrating humanoid robots into daily life demands effective
collaboration, where robots must accurately perceive human ac-
tions and context to work toward common objectives. Previous
studies generate robot action sequences for human instructional
videos, but most rely on offline processing with pre-segmented
clips. In real-world interaction, however, robots must handle
unsegmented multimodal inputs in a streaming manner. In this
paper, we extend a Q-Former-based robot action generation
framework to streaming processing. Our method extracts audio-
visual features from short temporal chunks, incorporates left-
context information into query embeddings, and incrementally
generates action sequences and confirmation messages using a
large language model. By carefully designing attention masks,
the model can be trained efficiently in parallel, similar to of-
fline methods. Experiments show that our streaming approach
achieves low latency with less than 10% accuracy degradation
compared to offline processing.
Index Terms: human-robot interaction, online robot action
planning, robot confirmation generation, streaming multimodal
Q-former, multimodal LLM
1. Introduction
Humanoid robots capable of dexterous manipulation are widely
regarded as promising platforms for supporting everyday hu-
man activities. To achieve this, effective human–robot collab-
oration requires robots to perceive and interpret human actions
and environmental context to achieve shared goals. Research on
robot action planning has recently been spurred by leveraging
multimodal scene understanding trained from human demon-
stration videos leveraging multimodal transformer architectures
that unify perception, language, and action.
Demonstration-driven vision–language modelslearn to
generate robot actions directly from visual and linguistic inputs
[1–4], with some approaches incorporating additional sensor
embeddings [5]. These methods map multimodal observations
and task instructions to executable action sequences, effectively
embedding planning within an end-to-end policy. In contrast,
LLM-based symbolic and open-world planning approaches
[6–9] treat language models as high-level planners that generate
compositional, text-based task plans through language reason-
ing. These methods target open-world and partially observable
settings and often employ iterative re-prompting to refine plan
executability [7]. While they demonstrate strong compositional
and semantic generalization, the resulting plans are typically ab-
stract and require additional grounding modules to execute on
**indicates the corresponding author.
Figure 1:Multimodal large language models generate robot
action confirmations together with the micro-step action se-
quences, enabling transparent communication and verification
of the robot’splanned future actionsbefore they are executed.
physical robots. More recentVision–Language–Action (VLA)
modelsincorporate stronger reasoning and temporal modeling
[10–12]. Audio features are also added [13–15]. In contrast to
symbolic LLM planners that require separate grounding mech-
anisms, VLA models embed perception and action within a sin-
gle embodied framework. Within this family, hierarchical VLA
approaches further emphasize open-ended instruction following
by autonomously decomposing language into executable action
sequences that are directly carried out by the robot [16].
Separately,Multimodal Scene Understandingmethods
that integrate diverse modalities such as audio, visual signals,
and text using multimodal language models have advanced
scene understanding for acquiring task knowledge from hu-
man demonstration videos. Early work on multimodal scene-
understanding-based robot action planning leveraged audio-
visual transformers trained on cooking videos [17, 18]. In
these approaches, multimodal representations of human action
steps were derived from demonstration videos and mapped to
executable robot micro-actions, enabling task-level planning
grounded in multimodal perception. Furthermore, these works
adopt aQ-former-style fusionmechanism, originally devel-
oped for efficient vision language alignment [19] and demon-
strated to be more efficient than conventional fusion methods
[20, 21], and embed it within a multimodal action planning ar-
chitecture to extract task-relevant representations for explicit
step-level generation and confirmation.
Despite extensive research on robot action planning, re-
liable real-world execution remains challenging due to distri-
bution shifts and unforeseen conditions. To reduce errors,
Human-in-the-loop replanningmethods have been proposed
[22, 23], allowing robots to correct plans through dialogue.
However, these approaches are reactive and intervene only af-
599
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2999
Figure 2:Q-former-based confirmation sentence generation
and action planning model [24]. AVBLIP-based action gen-
eration with a Q-former. The generated embeddings are fed to
the LLM decoder.
ter failures occur. One approach integrates confirmation gen-
eration directly into multimodal planning, enabling proactive
human validation before execution and reducing failure risk at
the planning stage as shown in Fig. 1 [24, 25]. Importantly,
it maintains multimodal grounding as in demonstration-driven
methods while introducing explicit step-level planning and con-
firmation generation.
Building upon this line of research, this paper proposes
Streaming Multimodal Q-Former, a real-time framework that
integrates streaming multimodal grounding with confirmation-
aware action planning in a low-latency manner.
2. Action Planning Data
The YouCook2 dataset [26] contains textual annotations that ex-
plain human cooking activities in a step-by-step manner [26].
The original human cooking instruction is adopted as the robot
action description. The human instructions were mapped into
micro-step action sequences, allowing a single-arm robot to
achieve task objectives equivalent to those demonstrated by hu-
mans [24].
a) Robot Action Description:For example, in a video demon-
strating the preparation of porcini mushroom risotto, an instruc-
tion is annotated as “Add the chopped porcini mushrooms to the
pan and stir them with the rice until evenly mixed,” with times-
tamps from 01:10 to 01:35.
b) Robot Micro-step Action:The micro-step action sequence
for a single-arm robot is structured using four elements:
“single-arm action,” “target object,” “preposition,” and “place.”
A predefined set of 12 primitive single-arm actions is employed:
Open, Close, Pick, Place, Pour, Stir, TurnOn, TurnOff, Wipe,
Cut, Scoop, Squeeze. The target objects are selected, whenever
possible, from the nouns appearing in the corresponding human
action instructions. As an illustration, the instruction described
above can be decomposed into the following sequence of micro-
steps:Pick (spoon), Scoop (porcini mushrooms) from (cutting
board), Place (porcini mushrooms) into (pan), Stir (rice and
mushrooms) in (pan).
3. Robot action generation using A VBLIP
This work employs A VBLIP [18], where BLIP-2 [19], a vision-
language pre-training method, is extended to handle multimodal
features. BLIP-2 bootstraps from a frozen image encoder and a
frozen LLM, where a Querying Transformer (Q-former) [27] is
Figure 3:Online streaming Q-former-based confirmation sen-
tence generation and action planning model. AVBLIP-based
action generation is performed in a streaming manner, where
chunk-wise multi-modal features are interleaved and converted
to query embeddings using the Q-former. The embeddings are
used to detect begin token “⟨S⟩” and the following token se-
quence, or end token “⟨/S⟩” that indicates no more tokens from
the current chunk.
trained to bridge the gap between the vision and text modalities.
The image encoder in BLIP-2 is replaced with audio-visual en-
coders for video, audio, and text feature sequences in A VBLIP.
Figure 2 illustrates the A VBLIP architecture consisting of a Q-
former and an LLM decoder. The Q-former is trained to extract
a fixed number of embeddings from a multimodal encoder that
outputs sequences of different lengths. The self-attention layers
are shared between two transformer submodules: (1) a multi-
modal transformer that interacts with the frozen audio-visual
encoders and (2) a text transformer that works as a text encoder
and a text decoder. A set of learnable query embeddings is input
to the multimodal transformer. The queries interact with each
other through self-attention layers and with audio-visual fea-
tures through cross-attention layers. The queries can addition-
ally interact with text through the same cross-attention layers.
Finally, the queries are converted to an output feature.
The LLM Decoder generates a sequence of micro-step ac-
tions for a single-arm robot from multimodal features aligned to
language features obtained by the Q-former. The LLM Decoder
is constructed with a frozen LLM and a feed-forward layer. Us-
ing the LLM as a decoder leverages the LLM’s inference capa-
bilities when generating action sequences. In this study, we use
OPT-2.7B [28] as the LLM.
The training of A VBLIP consists of two stages: (1)
multimodal-language representation learning with frozen mul-
timodal encoders and (2) multimodal-to-language generative
learning with a frozen LLM. In the second stage, we connect
the Q-former to the frozen LLM Decoder and perform multi-
modal action sequence generation. As shown in Fig. 2, the ex-
tracted multimodal features from the video clip are converted
to token embeddings using the Q-former. The embedding vec-
tors are then projected to the LLM embedding space using a
fully-connected layer. Then, the LLM Decoder generates ac-
tion sequences and descriptions (confirmation sentences) for the
given video clip. We use the cross-entropy loss function for the
ground-truth sequences in this stage.
600
4. Online streaming A VBLIP
4.1. Architecture
In this paper, we extend the A VBLIP-based system architecture
to process the video input in a streaming manner and output a
response sentence and action sequence at any appropriate time.
The original A VBLIP model in Fig. 2 generates a response se-
quence for a short video clip of around 10-20 seconds by ex-
tracting image, video, and audio features, concatenating them,
and feeding the result to the Q-former and the LLM decoder.
In this case, we need to provide the exact beginning and end
time of the video clip. On the other hand, the proposed stream-
ing A VBLIP system in Fig. 3 generates the output sequence
by extracting the multimodal features from each short chunk
(e.g., 1 second) and interleaving them to feed the result to the
Q-former and the LLM. This can be repeated over sequential
chunks in a streaming manner, and the LLM predicts the begin-
of-sequence and the following tokens, or the end-of-sequence
token that indicates no more tokens are generated from the cur-
rent chunk. In this way, the LLM decides the right timing to
output the response based on the chunk-wise query embeddings
generated by the Q-former, where the model does not require
explicit video clip segmentation.
Interleaving and chunking approaches have already been
applied to LLM-based streaming automatic speech recognition
(ASR) [29,30]. These approaches alternately perform audio en-
coding and token generation frame by frame or chunk by chunk
to achieve low-latency ASR. We essentially follow those ideas,
but extend them for the A VBLIP framework so they can work
with the Q-former without retraining the LLM decoder.
4.2. Alignment
To train the streaming model, we need to provide alignment
information between the input chunks and the target tokens.
One reasonable alignment is that all target tokens are aligned
to the last chunk of the video clip, according to the manual
annotation of the training data. Furthermore, we can promote
the model to output the response earlier than the end of clip to
achieve low-latency responses. However, unlike speech recog-
nition or speech translation, it is difficult to estimate precise
frame-to-token alignments using CTC and Transducer models.
For conversation tasks, real human-to-human conversation data
with utterance-level annotation are used to train the model to re-
spond to the user in natural response timing. However, there is
no sufficient data with plausible annotations for human-to-robot
dialog and action generation.
In this work, we investigate two approaches:
Sampling: During training, we sample a response time for
each video clip by randomly selecting a chunk earlier than the
last chunk in the clip, where we avoid selecting aggressively
early chunks by enforcing an allowable maximum shift.
Loss-based selection: We sample a response time using the
sampling method and compute the loss function. We fur-
ther compute the loss for the last chunk of the clip. If the
sampled loss is smaller or sufficiently close to the last loss,
we backprop from the sampled loss; otherwise, we do so
from the last loss. This method requires more computation
than the simple sampling, but we could avoid irrelevant re-
sponse timing by considering the loss difference. We apply
a fixed thresholdτ(>0)to adopt the sampled loss based on
(Lsmpl−Lorig)<τ, whereL smpl andL orig denote the sampled
and last losses after length normalization.
Figure 4:Attention masks for training the online Q-former. The
green area allows attention between input (keys) and output
(queries) while the gray area blocks the attention.
Table 1:YouCook2 data [26].
#Videos #Clips Duration/clip [sec]
Training 1173 8743 19.7
Validation 416 3117 19.8
4.3. Attention mask
In training, we can efficiently parallelize forward and backward
propagation for chunk-wise sequence generation by designing
attention masks appropriately. Figure 4 shows examples of at-
tention masks used for training the online streaming A VBLIP
model. In each mask, the X-axis shows input sequence cor-
responding to the key/value and Y-axis shows output sequence
corresponding to the query.
In Fig. 4, (a) Causal mask is used for self-attention in the
Q-former and the original LLM decoder, (b) Chunk-based mask
is used for cross-attention in the Q-former, where each query
token in a chunk can attend to the past chunks to make the query
embeddings to be left-context dependent, not attending to the
future chunks, and (c) Chunk-based mask for self-attention in
the streaming LLM decoder, where the LLM attends to only
the query embeddings and the generated tokens in the current
chunk. This example assumes the response is generated from
the third chunk.
4.4. Decoding
Sequence generation is performed by chunk-based decoding
using the streaming Q-former and the LLM decoder. The
Q-former receives multi-modal features chunk by chunk and
outputs query embeddings by attending to the current and all
cached previous hidden states. The LLM decoder generates a
token sequence auto-regressively from the query embeddings of
the current chunk, and proceeds to the next chunk if it predicts
the end-of-sequence token. In this streaming process, we use
greedy decoding to output the predicted tokens immediately.
5. Experiments
5.1. Setup
We evaluated the proposed method using the YouCook2
dataset [26], which consists of cooking action video clips
aligned with human action instruction in natural language. The
statistics of the dataset are summarized in Table 1. We used the
validation set for evaluation since the test set annotation was not
publicly available, splitting the validation set in half and apply-
ing cross-validation to obtain the final results.
We utilized micro-step action sequences [24], which con-
tain 2,790 unique action phrases of 195 verbs, 2,229 objects,
33 prepositions, and 1002 places. Multimodal features such
601
Table 2:Comparison of action sequence and response quality on different model configurations.
Alignment
in training
Average
latency [sec]
Miss detection
rate [%]
Action sequence Action description
Model Generation BLEU-2 METEOR BLUE-2 METEOR
(1) Baseline N/A offline - - 0.357 0.251 0.221 0.154
(2) w/ interleave N/A offline - - 0.354 0.248 0.219 0.152
(3) Streaming clip end offline - - 0.356 0.246 0.216 0.154
(4) Streaming clip end online −0.78(±2.41)5.20 0.321 0.223 0.197 0.138
(5) Streaming sampling online −2.12(±2.72)4.80 0.319 0.215 0.194 0.138
(6) Streaming loss-based online−2.92(±2.20)4.40 0.328 0.228 0.212 0.145
[25] N/A offline - - 0.370 0.260 0.229 0.159
as video, image, and audio were extracted using Omnivore
[31], Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP) [32],
and Audio Spectrogram Transformer (AST) [33], respectively.
The features were then projected and concatenated to a sin-
gle multimodal feature sequence before feeding them to the Q-
former. In the streaming scenario, we apply this process for
each one-second chunk. The dimensions of the audio, image,
and video features were527,768, and3806, respectively.
In prior studies [24,25], subtitles in the video were also used
to improve the performance. However, we did not use them
since the subtitles are typically not available in online stream-
ing scenarios. Although it is possible to employ a streaming
ASR system to feed the partial transcript, this makes the sys-
tem complex and the evaluation process complicated. We will
consider this extension in future work.
The Q-former was initialized with the pre-trained weights
of BERTbase [34], while the cross-attention layers were ran-
domly initialized. The number of dimensions of the hidden lay-
ers was set to 768 and the number of queries was set to 16,
which resulted in 188M parameters in total. We finetuned the
Q-former with the frozen LLM decoder for both offline and on-
line scenarios, respectively. For alignment sampling, the allow-
able maximum shift was set to 5 seconds prior to the clip’s end
position. For loss-based selection, the thresholdτwas set to
0.002because our preliminary experiments showed relatively
high performance around this value.
The performance was evaluated using the BLEU-2 and ME-
TEOR scores computed between the generated and ground-
truth sequences as used in the robotics field [35,36]. We applied
cross-validation, where one half of the validation set was used
to select the best-epoch model, and the other half was used to
measure model performance. Thus, the shown scores are the
average over the two subsets.
Furthermore, we simulated streaming use case by append-
ing5−10seconds of preceding and succeeding video frames to
each video clip and evaluated whether the model can correctly
generate action sequences and description in a reasonable tim-
ing. The appended margin length was randomly selected and
sometimes shortened if there is an overlap with the previous
or next video clip. To evaluate the streaming performance, we
measured average latency (±standard deviation) and miss de-
tection rate. The average latency is the time at which the model
starts to generate an action sequence, relative to the end time of
the original clip. The miss detection rate is the proportion of
clips for which the model did not generate any action sequence.
5.2. Results
Table 2 shows the quality of action sequences and descriptions
generated by the baseline and streaming Q-former-LLM sys-
tems. “(1) Baseline” denotes the Q-former model trained with
pairs of concatenated multimodal features and their target se-
quences without streaming extension. Compared to the prior
work in [25], BLEU and METEOR scores were slightly worse.
This is mainly because we used greedy decoding while they
used beam search decoding with beam size 5. “(2) w/ inter-
leave” shows the result when we interleaved the multimodal fea-
tures into one-second chunks but trained the model in the offline
setting similar to the baseline. Compared to “(1) Baseline,” the
differences are negligible, confirming that interleaving the fea-
tures does not have negative impact on the performance. “(3)
Streaming” shows the result of the streaming Q-former used
as an offline model, where the model was forced to generate
the sequence from the chunk at the original clip ending time.
We do not see significant differences in the performance met-
rics, meaning that the streaming model was trained successfully
without losing the performance for offline use.
The results of streaming Q-formers from “(4)” to “(6)” cor-
respond to the models trained to start generating the target se-
quence at clip end, sampled chunk, and selected chunk by CE
loss, respectively. Compared to the baseline, we observed a
certain degradation in BLUE and METEOR scores. This is
mainly because the model incorrectly started to generate re-
sponses attending to irrelevant portion of the video clip, and
in some cases, the model did not output any tokens other than
the end-of-sequence token. However, the degradations are less
than 10% relative in all sequence quality metrics. Generally, ac-
curacy degradation due to streaming processing is unavoidable,
but a 10% drop is still within an acceptable range. Further-
more, these models show lower average latency compared with
the baseline, ranging from 1 to 3 seconds, which is important
for low-latency streaming systems. Among the three streaming
models, the model with loss-based alignment demonstrated the
best performance across all metrics. Also, the standard devi-
ation of latency shows that the loss-based method selects out-
put time with less fluctuation. This indicates that the alignment
should be selected to avoid increasing the loss during training.
6. Conclusions
This paper proposed a Q-Former-based robot action generation
framework that enables streaming processing. Our method ex-
tracts audio-visual features from short temporal chunks, incor-
porates left-context information into query embeddings, and in-
crementally generates action sequences and confirmation mes-
sages using a large language model. By carefully designing at-
tention masks, the model can be trained efficiently in parallel,
similar to offline methods. Experiments show that our stream-
ing approach achieves low latency with less than 10% accuracy
degradation compared to offline processing. We also investi-
gated three different methods to provide alignment information
to the model during training, and demonstrated that the loss-
based alignment selection works better than other approaches.
602