Tight Boundary Prediction in Speaker Diarization Using
Causal–Anticausal Consistency
Shota Horiguchi ID ∗∗, Marc Delcroix ID , Naohiro Tawara ID , Takanori Ashihara ID , Atsushi Ando ID
NTT, Inc., Japan
horiguchi@ieee.org
Abstract
Multi-talker conversational automatic speech recognition data
are often used to train speaker diarization models. Because such
data prioritize semantic continuity, pauses and boundary mar-
gins are included within speech segments, resulting in loose an-
notations. Models trained on such data tend to internalize mech-
anisms that reproduce this looseness, although tight speech in-
tervals are sometimes preferable for downstream applications.
In this paper, we address the novel task of enabling models to
produce tight predictions using loose labels. Our method gen-
erates tighter pseudo labels using causal and anticausal models,
which are inherently incapable of learning loosening behavior.
We further propose a co-training scheme that iteratively tight-
ens labels and updates both models for more progressive re-
finement. Experimental results show that the proposed method
recovers about 70 % of the tightening effect achieved by ideal
tight-label training and improves downstream performance.
Index Terms: speaker diarization, tight boundary, causal–
anticausal consistency, co-training
1. Introduction
Speaker diarization is the task of determining who is speaking
when from an audio signal. It is typically addressed using mod-
els that take audio as input and output speaker-wise speech seg-
ments [1–8]. Training such models requires a large amount of
data annotated with speaker-wise speech intervals, and in prac-
tice, multi-talker automatic speech recognition (ASR) corpora
are often used for this purpose [9–12].
A recent study has shown that speech segments in ASR
corpora are often loosely annotated [13]: pauses within utter-
ances are labeled as part of speech, and segment boundaries
are padded at both ends to prevent truncation [14–18]. When
diarization models are trained with such loose labels, their out-
puts also tend to be loose (Fig. 1, left). This property is not al-
ways desirable for applications that rely on diarization results.
For example, in guided source separation (GSS) [19,20], where
diarization results are used as prior knowledge to estimate time-
frequency masks, tighter intervals provide stronger constraints
on speech absence. Speaker diarization or channel-wise voice
activity detection (V AD) is also used to generate training data
for spoken dialogue models [21–23] and to evaluate the nat-
uralness of conversational statistics in generated data [24, 25].
In these cases, loose outputs may blur conversational struc-
ture: pauses may be classified as parts of speech intervals, or
backchannel may be treated as part of interruptions. Therefore,
there is a need for speaker diarization models that can produce
tighter speech intervals.
**indicates the corresponding author.
Tight
Input recording
Diarization model
Boundary padding
& Pause filling
Diarization (tight)
Latent tight segments
Diarization
(tight)
Prediction Tight
No padding
or filling
learned
Padding
or filling
prevented
Loose
Model trained with
loose annotation
Model trained with
tight annotation
Loose prediction
Tight prediction
Diarization
(tight)
Conventional training This study
Figure 1:Comparison of model behavior in conventional train-
ing and in this study.
At present, the only way to train a model that can predict
segments with tight boundaries is to provide tight labels as su-
pervision (Fig. 1, center). In the prior study [13], forced align-
ment was used to tighten loose segments in ASR corpora; how-
ever, this approach requires recordings in which each speaker
is recorded on a separate channel, such as headset recordings.
For audio uploaded to sharing platforms, which are fundamen-
tal data sources for training high-performing models nowa-
days [26, 27], all speakers’ speech is mixed into a single chan-
nel, making this method inapplicable. On the other hand, man-
ual tight annotation is costly. One dataset series that provides
such tight annotations is DIHARD I–III [28–30]. According
to the DIHARD III evaluation plan [31],it was found that
manual annotation to this spec [...] required use of highly
skilled and experienced annotators [...] making the annota-
tion extremely slow and costly [...] with real time rates typi-
cally greater than 15X and sometimes exceeding 30X. Another
example is V oxConverse [32], which provides annotations for
YouTube videos. It accelerates annotation by leveraging face-
tracking results from video data. However, this approach as-
sumes videos in which speakers are clearly visible and still
“takes around twice the video duration” to annotate. Paying
this level of additional cost on top of transcription expenses is
not practical.
In this paper, we address a novel task: training a model to
output tight segments from loose annotations in ASR corpora
(Fig. 1, right). In conventional diarization model training, loose
target labels result in similarly loose outputs (Fig. 1, left). This
occurs because the model becomes entangled not only with de-
tecting underlying tight speech segments but also with padding
segment boundaries and filling pauses.
To address this task, we propose a method that generates
tighter pseudo labels from the outputs of causal and anticausal
models and uses them to train a final non-causal model. Even
when trained with loose labels, causal and anticausal models are
inherently incapable of learning to pad segment boundaries or
fill pauses. A causal model cannot pad before a speech segment,
6161
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-45
whereas an anticausal model cannot pad after it. Moreover, nei-
ther model can immediately determine whether a silence fol-
lowing a speech segment corresponds to an actual termination
or a pause to be filled. As a result, their capability to repro-
duce loose boundaries is inherently limited compared with that
of a non-causal model. Accordingly, we use their outputs to
mask loose annotations and generate tighter pseudo labels. We
further propose the co-training of causal and anticausal models.
At each training step, the labels are tightened using their outputs
and immediately used for parameter updates, thereby enabling
progressive tightening. Finally, we empirically demonstrate that
a non-causal model trained with the resulting tighter pseudo la-
bels produces tighter predictions than one trained with loose
labels, leading to improvements in downstream tasks.
2. Related work
2.1. Speaker diarization
Training end-to-end neural diarization (EEND) models requires
a large-scale dataset. In early studies, since it was difficult to
achieve large-scale training using only real data, simulated mix-
tures were used for pretraining [1, 4–6]. In recent years, an
increasing number of corpora have been developed for multi-
talker ASR; as a result, it has become possible to aggregate such
corpora and combine them with corpora curated for diarization,
thereby constructing large-scale datasets composed entirely of
real recordings for training [9–12, 33, 34]. At the same time,
evaluation has also been conducted on these corpora using the
same parameters to demonstrate that the models can generalize
across a wide range of domains without adaptation to specific
domains [11, 12, 34].
However, a recent study identified issues with training on
a compound dataset of ASR and diarization corpora [13]. The
study pointed out that speech boundaries in ASR corpora are
generally looser than those in diarization corpora. This is be-
cause ASR corpora tend to avoid splitting segments at short
pauses, so as not to break sentences in the middle, or trun-
cate speech at segment boundaries. When an EEND model
is trained on a compound dataset with mixed boundary preci-
sion, it leads to corpus-specific memorization of boundary tight-
ness. This behavior is undesirable for real-world applications,
since it becomes unclear whether the model will output tight
or loose boundaries for data from unseen domains. It has also
been empirically shown that tight boundaries are beneficial in
backend applications such as speech separation and ASR, espe-
cially when combined with subsequent boundary-loosening op-
erations such as morphological closing. In light of these facts,
it is preferable for speaker diarization models to predict tight
speech segments that exclude silent intervals. The only pro-
posed solution in the aforementioned study was to tighten all la-
bels in the compound dataset via forced alignment, which limits
its applicability to corpora with speaker-wise channel-separated
recordings. In contrast, this paper addresses a more challenging
problem: enabling EEND models to produce tight boundaries
using only loose labels with single-channel mixture recordings.
2.2. Training from unreliable labels
The problem we address is that segments annotated as speech
may in fact contain silent portions. This is related to the broader
literature on machine learning with noisy labels. The most
common setting assumes that labels are incorrect with some
probability due to unreliable annotators. Typical approaches
include the use of noise transition matrices [35, 36] and label
smoothing [37]. A more realistic setting assumes that the er-
rors are more likely for hard samples. Representative methods
include sample reweighting [38], curriculum learning [39, 40],
and co-training [41, 42], which select high-confidence samples
based on the probabilities output from the prediction models. In
the speaker diarization and segmentation domain, collar-aware
training has been proposed to address annotation noise [43,44].
However, this approach simplifies the problem by allowing the
model to ignore predictions near segment boundaries and is
therefore not aligned with our objective, which is to accurately
predict those boundaries instead.
What fundamentally distinguishes our problem from these
settings is that both ASR-oriented (i.e., loosely annotated) la-
bels and diarization-oriented (i.e., tightly annotated) labels are
valid when viewed from their respective perspectives. It has
been experimentally shown that models can learn the character-
istics of either labeling scheme and generalize well [13]. From
a diarization-oriented perspective, the errors in ASR-oriented
labels, which are mostly false alarms, tend to be distributed
around true utterance boundaries. When trained with ASR-
oriented labels, a model learns to confidently predict speech in
such intervals by leveraging contextual information, even when
no speech is actually present, as illustrated in Fig. 1. There-
fore, the aforementioned confidence-based noisy-label training
approaches are not applicable in this setting.
3. Problem formulation
3.1. Formulation of the conventional speaker diarization
Speaker diarization is the problem of estimating speaker-wise
speech activity at each frame. LetX= [x 1,...,x T ]∈R D×T
denote frame-wiseD-dimensional acoustic features, whereT
is the number of frames. GivenX, the goal is to estimate the
speaker activities ˆY= [ˆy1,...,ˆy T ]∈{0,1} S×T , whereSis
the number of speakers andˆyt := [ˆy1,t,...,ˆy S,t]T represents
the speaker activity vector, withˆys,t = 1indicating that speaker
sis active at time framet.
In the EEND framework [1, 2], a model is trained to out-
put frame-wise posterior probabilitiesP= [p 1,...,p T ]∈
(0,1)S×T wherept := [p1,t,...,p S,t]T, which yield ˆYby ap-
plying a thresholdτ:
ˆys,t =
(
1 (p s,t≥τ),
0 (p s,t <τ). (1)
Hereafter, we useϕ τ(·)to denote the elementwise extension
of the above thresholding rule, yielding ˆY=ϕ τ(P), and we
setτ= 0.5throughout this paper. Such a model is trained
in a supervised manner using the loss between the true label
Y= (y s,t)∈{0,1} S×T and the predictionP. Since the model
output is permutation-free in the speaker order, it is necessary to
first find speaker correspondence between them. LetP (Y) :=
ΠP,YPdenote the permutation ofPwhose speaker order best
matchesY, where the permutation matrixΠ P,Y is defined as
ΠP,Y := arg min
Π∈PS
∥ΠP−Y∥ F.(2)
Here,P S is the set ofS×Spermutation matrices and∥·∥ F
denotes the Frobenius norm.
In this paper, we adopt a variant of EEND that outputs pos-
terior probabilities for each powerset class of speakers [10]. Let
P(S)denote the powerset of the speaker index set{1,...,S}.
In this case, the model outputsqt := [q1,t...,q R,t]T∈(0,1) R
at each framet, whereq r,t represents the probability of ther-th
class corresponding to the speaker setR r ∈ P(S). Follow-
6162
Annotated label (loose)
True label (tight, unknown)
Causal prediction
Anticausal prediction
Pause
filling
Padding
at the
beginning
Padding
at the
end
(a)Conceptual illustration
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
0 2 4 6 8 10
0.0
0.5
1.0
Time [s]
Speech probability
Label (loose)
Label (tight)
Causal prediction
Anticausal prediction (b)Labels and actual inference results for three 10-second chunks
Figure 2:Behavior of causal and anticausal models in single-speaker cases.
ing the previous studies [10], we only consider the overlap of
at most two speakers, and thus restrictR r such that|R r|≤2,
which results inR= P2
i=0
 S
i

. In this paper, we setS= 4,
so the set of possible classes is given byR r ∈{∅,{1},{2},
{3},{4},{1,2},{1,3},{1,4},{2,3},{2,4},{3,4}}. We de-
fine a mappingQ2P:Q7→Pfrom the powerset posterior
Q= [q 1,...,q T ]to the speaker-wise posteriorP, where the
conversion is given by
ps,t =
X
r:s∈R r
qr,t.(3)
Using the posterior probabilities for the powerset classes, the
training objective to be minimized is defined as the multi-class
cross-entropy loss:
ℓ
 
Q(Y),Y

=− 1
T
TX
t=1
X
Rr∈P(S)
|Rr|≤2
y′
r,t logq (Y)
r,t ,(4)
wherey′
r,t = 1if the reference labely t corresponds toRr, and
y′
r,t = 0otherwise, andQ (Y) = (q(Y)
r,t )is the permuted version
ofQ, aligned toYusing the correspondingPderived from (3).
3.2. Formulation of speaker diarization in this study:
Treating annotated labels as weak supervision
Prior studies treated annotated label ˜Y= (˜ys,t)∈{0,1} S×T
as the ground truth during training, i.e.,Y= ˜Y. However, as
noted earlier, the labeling criteria differ substantially between
ASR and diarization corpora. In contrast, we consistently re-
gard tight labels as the true labelsY. We assume that the anno-
tated labels in ASR corpora have loose boundaries, i.e., frames
annotated as speech may in fact be silent:1
ys,t∈
(
{0,1}(˜y s,t = 1),
{0}(˜y s,t = 0). (5)
This paper addresses the problem of training a model to estimate
the unknown tight labelsYusing only the annotated, potentially
loose labels ˜Y.
In this paper, we train models using a compound set of ASR
and diarization corpora. We assume that it is known a pri-
ori whether each sample originates from an ASR corpus (i.e.,
loosely annotated) or a diarization corpus (i.e., tightly anno-
tated). For ASR corpora, we generate pseudo labels by tight-
ening the original annotations ˜Yusing the proposed methods
described in the following section. For diarization corpora, we
assume thatY= ˜Y.
1In practice, the speech intervals obtained via forced alignment may
fall outside the loose annotation. However, the extent of such deviations
is very small (less than 2 % according to [13]). Therefore, in this work,
we define the problem under the assumption that the tight intervals are
always contained within the loose intervals.
4. Proposed method
4.1. Concept
As illustrated in Fig. 1, conventional training leads speaker di-
arization models to estimate not only who is speaking when but
also to pad segment boundaries and fill pauses. If the former
functionality can be isolated, it would benefit downstream tasks.
However, once these functions are internalized in a diarization
model, disentangling them becomes challenging.
Considering how the latter functionality is realized, it likely
requires the model to first identify latent tight speech segments
and then use contextual information to produce loose bound-
aries that match the looseness of the so-called ground truth la-
bels. Leveraging this insight, we propose a method that deliber-
ately employs causal and anticausal architectures to prevent the
model from performing padding segment boundaries and filling
pauses, thereby separating these functionalities. 2
We first explain the operating principle of the proposed
method in a simple single-speaker case in Sec. 4.2. Next,
in Sec. 4.3, we discuss additional challenges that arise in the
multi-speaker setting, typically addressed by speaker diariza-
tion, along with their solutions. Finally, in Sec. 4.4, we intro-
duce a training strategy that enables more efficient use of the
proposed method.
4.2. Preliminary: Label tightening in single-speaker cases
4.2.1. Causal–anticausal consistency
First, for simplicity, we consider single-speaker cases, i.e.,S=
1. To determine how much to pad segment boundaries or how
long to fill a silent interval, a model must first identify tightly
bounded speech segments and then examine the surrounding
context. Since diarization models are typically based on bidi-
rectional [1], fully attentive [2,5], or large-receptive-field archi-
tectures [33,43], such capabilities tend to be acquired implicitly.
However, disentangling the detection of tight speech segments
from context-based segment expansion and pause filling is dif-
ficult because all of these functions are learned together. In this
paper, we intentionally adopt a unidirectional architecture that
deprives the model of such abilities, with the aim of separat-
ing these functions. Specifically, we employ two unidirectional
models: one can only see the past frames, and the other can
only see the future frames. For simplicity, we call the former
thecausal modeland the latter theanticausal model.
We first describe the behavior of the causal model
(Fig. 2(a), third row). Since it cannot access future frames,
it cannot pad the beginning of a speech segment, even when
trained with loose labels. Moreover, once speech is interrupted,
the model cannot predict whether it will resume shortly after-
2Interested readers may also refer to a study on sound event detec-
tion using causal and anticausal models with weak labels [45].
6163
Label
Annotated label (loose)
True label (tight, unknown)
Prediction
Causal prediction
Anticausal prediction
Speaker
confusion
Speaker 1
Speaker 2
Speaker 1
Speaker 2
Speaker 1
Speaker 2
Speaker 1
Speaker 2
(a)Labels and predictions
Not detectedthreshold
Sub-threshold interval
Averaged prediction Tightened labelPrediction Threshold MaskAverage
(b)Basic tightening
Prediction Averaged prediction Tightened labelPrediction of V AD
Not tightenedthreshold
Sub-threshold interval
(c)VAD tightening
Detected
Averaged prediction Tightened labelReassigned predictionReassign
Tightened
Prediction
threshold
Sub-threshold interval
(d)SC tightening
Figure 3:Example of label tightening in a two-speaker case.
ward. As a result, it cannot determine whether a subsequent
silent interval should be treated as part of a speech segment or as
the end of speech. Consequently, the model becomes progres-
sively less confident after speech offset, resulting in lower pos-
terior probabilities. The anticausal model exhibits analogous
behavior. It cannot pad the end of a speech segment, and the
posterior probability before speech onset gradually increases,
as shown in the fourth row of Fig. 2(a). Representative exam-
ples from actual predictions are also shown in Fig. 2(b).
From these observations, both the causal and anticausal
models should yield high speech posteriors over the true speech
intervals. In contrast, in the padded or filled regions, one of
the two models is expected to fail to detect speech in principle.
Therefore, by appropriately combining the outputs of these two
models, it becomes possible to recover tight speech segments.
In this paper, we simply take the average of posteriors followed
by thresholding for combination.
It is also possible to use this thresholded average directly as
the tightened label; however, because it is based on inference,
it inevitably contains inference errors. Among these errors,
missed detections cannot be distinguished from those caused
by the tightening process itself. In contrast, false-alarm speech
can be filtered out by exploiting the property in (5), namely that
regions annotated as silence in the loose labels are guaranteed
to be silent. This filtering is equivalent to masking the loose
speech segments using the causal prediction ⃗P∈(0,1) S×T
and anticausal prediction ⃖P∈(0,1) S×T . The final tightened
labels are given by
Ytight = ˜Y⊙ϕ τ
 ⃗P+ ⃖P
2

,(6)
where⊙denotes the Hadamard product. ThisY tight is used as
the target labels for training the final non-causal model.
4.2.2. Restoration of over-tightened speech segments
It is difficult to determine whether the reduction of speech from
ˆYtoY tight results from a correct tightening or from erroneous
deletions caused by inference errors. Moreover, when this la-
bel update is repeatedly applied, as described in Sec. 4.4, the
method may suffer from over-tightening. Although annotated
segment boundaries may be inaccurate, each annotated inter-
val should still contain speech and thus should not be removed
entirely. We thus propose restoring lost segments due to tight-
ening using the corresponding segments from the loose annota-
tions. In this paper, we relax the constraint by regarding cases
in which more than 50 % of a segment is removed as excessive
deletion, and restore the corresponding loose segment.
4.3. Label tightening in multi-speaker cases
For speaker diarization purposes, the tightening method de-
scribed in Sec. 4.2 should be extended to multi-speaker cases.
We introduce the following three types of tightening methods.
4.3.1. Basic tightening
The simplest variant applies the procedure in Sec. 4.2 speaker-
wise, as depicted in Fig. 3(b). Since the orders of speakers in
⃗P, ⃖P, and ˜Yare not necessarily the same, we first align ⃗Pand
⃖Pand then align them with ˜Yby
⃖P←Π ⃖P, ⃗P
⃖P,(7)
⃗P, ⃖P←Π ⃗P+ ⃖P
2 , ˜Y
⃗P,Π ⃗P+ ⃖P
2 , ˜Y
⃖P.(8)
We then apply the tightening procedure in Sec. 4.2 in a speaker-
wise manner. To avoid redundancy, the following explanation
of the tightening methods assumes that the speaker order has
already been aligned by (7)–(8).
4.3.2. VAD tightening
In multi-speaker cases, inference results may include speaker
confusion additionally. In the example shown in Fig. 3, we as-
sume that the final speech segment of the speaker 2 is incor-
rectly predicted as the speaker 1’s speech in the output of the
causal model (Fig. 3(a)). In such a situation, the same speech
segment would be attributed to different speakers in the causal
and anticausal outputs. When the posteriors are averaged as in
the basic tightening approach, the label-tightening mask may
disappear for both speakers (Fig. 3(b)).
To address this issue, the second tightening method is de-
signed to be robust against speaker confusion by constructing
the mask based on voice activity detection (V AD), as shown in
Fig. 3(c). Because the models output probabilities over the pow-
erset classes, the silence-class output (⃗q0,t and⃖q0,t for causal
and anticausal output, respectively) can be regarded as the com-
plement of the speech probabilities. Let ⃗Q>0∈(0,1) S×T be
obtained by stackingScopies of[1−⃗q 0,1,...,1−⃗q 0,T ]ver-
6164
Algorithm 1:Posterior reassignment in SC tightening
Input :PredictionP={p s,t}, annotated label
˜Y={˜y s,t}, thresholdτ
Output:Reassigned predictionP
1fort= 1toTdo
2M←∅▷Indices of missed speakers
3F←∅▷Indices of false alarm
4fors= 1toSdo▷Find candidates
5if˜y s,t = 1∧p s,t≤τthen▷Missed speaker
6PushBack(M,s)
7else if˜y s,t = 0∧p s,t >τthen▷False alarm
8PushBack(F,s)
9whileM̸=∅∧F̸=∅do▷Reassignment
10s 1←PopFront(M)
11s 2←PopFront(F)
12Swap(p s1,t,ps2,t)
tically, and define ⃖Q>0 analogously. Using these, we obtain the
tight