ABSE-NET: A Lightweight Neural Model for Active Binaural Speech
Enhancement in Open-Fit Hearing Aids
De Hu ID 1, Xue Du ID 1, Qingying Zhao ID 1, Qintuya Si ID 2,∗
1 College of Computer Science, Inner Mongolia University, China
2 College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Inner Mongolia University, China
cshood@imu.edu.cn, duxue@mail.imu.edu.cn, zhaoqingying@imu.edu.cn, siqty@imu.edu.cn
Abstract
Open-fit hearing aids have attracted growing attention due
to their superior wearing comfort. However, the open-fit de-
sign inevitably causes acoustic leakage into the ear canal, de-
grading the performance of existing binaural speech enhance-
ment (BSE). To this end, we proposeABSE-NET, an active
BSE framework integrating active noise control (ANC) with
BSE to jointly enhance target speech and suppress acous-
tic leakage. The ABSE-NET pipeline cascades a binaural
MVDR (BMVDR) with a lightweight neural network (LNN).
The former achieves a coarse BSE, whereas the latter simultane-
ously cancels acoustic leakage and compensates for BMVDR-
induced distortion. The LNN uses an encoder-decoder with
a feature fusion module, which includes frequency-time de-
pendency learning and convolutional attention blocks. Unlike
traditional BSE+ANC solutions via adaptive filtering, ABSE-
NET needs no in-ear microphone in practical deployment. Ex-
periments validate its superiority over state-of-the-art methods.
Code repository: https://github.com/Bream101/ABSE-NET.
Index Terms: binaural speech enhancement, active noise con-
trol, open-fit hearing aids, acoustic leakage
1. Introduction
Binaural speech enhancement (BSE) is a key component of
modern hearing aids (HAs) and aims to deliver high-quality au-
dio to hearing-impaired users [1, 2, 3]. Currently, most BSE
approaches are designed for closed-fit HAs, which cause the
occlusion effect and may lead to discomfort during long-term
use [4, 5]. To mitigate this issue while maintaining a natural
listening experience, open-fit (or semi-open-fit) HAs have been
developed [6, 7, 8]. By employing a physical vent to relieve
ear canal pressure, these configurations effectively bypass the
occlusion effect. However, in such configurations (Figure 1),
external noisy signal inevitably leaks into the ear canal, lead-
ing to degraded BSE performance.
1.1. Related Works
Conventional BSE.Existing BSE approaches can be broadly
categorized into two main paradigms: model-driven and data-
driven . Specifically, model-driven BSE adopts statistical sig-
nal processing methods derived from physical models of the
degradation and probabilistic models of the involved signals [9],
which typically exploit the statistical independence between
the target speech and the interference fields. For example, the
binaural minimum variance distortionless response (BMVDR)
[10, 11] beamformer (BF) extended the classical MVDR BF
*indicates the corresponding author.
Leakage
Signal
Noise
Figure 1:Acoustic leakage in semi-open-fit HAs. The exter-
nal microphones (hollow circles) provide input for BSE, and
the enhanced signal is played through the internal loudspeaker.
However, external noisy signal leaks into the ear canal through
the vent and corrupts the enhanced signal, which is detected by
the error microphone (solid circle) placed deep inside the ear
canal.
[12] to the binaural setting, which aims to minimize the out-
put noise power while preserving the target source and its spa-
tial cues. Analogously, based on the multi-channel Wiener fil-
ter (MWF) [13], several binaural MWF approaches [14, 15]
were presented which extend the mean squared error minimiza-
tion to the binaural setup, aiming to preserve the spatial per-
ception of the target speech while balancing noise reduction
and speech distortion. These model-driven BSE approaches
are often computationally efficient and perform well when the
ground-truth spatial covariance matrices (SCMs) of speech and
noise are available. In practice, however, accurately estimating
SCMs is challenging due to the temporal variability of speech
and the complexity of real-world acoustic scenes, resulting in
substantial performance degradation and even speech distortion
in model-driven BSE. With the advent of deep learning, data-
driven approaches [16, 17, 18] have shown tremendous poten-
tial for BSE owing to their capability to model complex, non-
linear dependencies in acoustic scenes. Among them, mask-
based methods [19, 20, 21, 22] learned time-frequency masks
from noisy inputs to derive essential statistics, e.g., SCMs,
or beamforming weights. In contrast, end-to-end frameworks
[23, 24, 25] bypassed the traditional beamforming pipeline by
directly learning a mapping from the noisy waveform to the
clean binaural signal. By exploiting data itself to guide and re-
fine the algorithm design, data-driven methods achieved strong
performance in BSE. Nevertheless, they are still constrained
by issues such as prohibitive computational complexity for
5176
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1660
hearing-aid deployment and high sensitivity to train–test mis-
match. In addition, most existing BSE approaches, whether
model-driven or data-driven, were designed for closed-fit HAs
and thus cannot handle the acoustic leakage problem in open-fit
HAs (Figure 1).
Active BSE (ABSE).To suppress the acoustic leakage in open-
fit HAs, active noise control (ANC) [26, 27, 28] has been incor-
porated into the BSE framework, forming a hybrid scheme that
is sometimes referred to as ABSE. Its mechanism is that the
internal loudspeaker simultaneously plays the enhanced signal
and an “anti-leakage” signal that cancels the leakage component
by generating a sound wave with the same amplitude but in-
verted phase, utilizing the principle of destructive interference.
BSE and ANC can be combined in either a cascaded architec-
ture [29, 30] or a parallel architecture [31], with BSE perform-
ing speech enhancement and ANC suppressing the leakage sig-
nal. Alternatively, state-of-the-art methods [32, 33] formulated
BSE and ANC within a unified optimization problem and de-
rived both closed-form and adaptive solutions, aiming to mini-
mize the global residual noise rather than optimizing each stage
individually. Nevertheless, these ABSE methods place an er-
ror microphone deep inside the ear canal to provide feedback
for model-driven adaptive filters, which is difficult in practice
because the ear canal is too narrow to accommodate a micro-
phone, making it uncomfortable for long-term wear. Although
some data-driven ANC approaches [34, 35] can operate with-
out the error microphone, they were not originally designed for
HA scenarios and incur high computational costs. These lim-
itations emphasize the necessity of developing lightweight and
data-driven ABSE methods that do not rely on an error micro-
phone placed deep inside the ear canal.
1.2. Contribution
In this work, we propose theABSE-NET, a lightweight neu-
ral model for ABSE in open-fit HAs. The pipeline of ABSE-
NET cascades a BMVDR BF with a lightweight neural network
(LNN), thereby combining the benefits of both model-driven
and data-driven approaches. Specifically, the BMVDR BF per-
forms a coarse BSE while preserving the spatial cues, whereas
the LNN is designed to simultaneously cancel the acoustic leak-
age and compensate for BMVDR-induced distortion. The LNN
adopts an encoder–decoder architecture with an intermediate
feature augmentation module, in which a novel frequency–time
dependency learning (F-TDL) block and a convolutional atten-
tion (ConvAtt) block are introduced to effectively refine latent
representations. To the best of our knowledge, ABSE-NET is
the first lightweight ABSE framework without requiring an in-
ear error microphone. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
ABSE-NET outperforms state-of-the-art approaches while ex-
hibiting remarkable superiority in terms of computational ef-
ficiency.Notations:Scalars, vectors, and matrices are repre-
sented by lowercase letters, bold lowercase letters, and bold up-
percase letters, respectively.
2. Preliminaries
We consider an open-fit HA configuration where each HA con-
sists ofM/2microphones, withMbeing an even number. In
the short-time Fourier transform (STFT) domain, lettingland
kbe the time and frequency indices, the multi-channel micro-
phone signaly(k,l)∈C M×1 can be represented as
y(k,l) =a(k)s(k,l) +
IX
i=1
bi(k)ni(k,l) +v(k,l),(1)
wherea(k)andb i(k)denote the acoustic transfer functions
(ATFs) of the target signals(k,l)and theith interferern i(k,l),
respectively,v(k,l)denotes the received background noise and
sensor self-noise, andIis the number of interferers. For nota-
tional simplicity, indiceskandlwill be omitted from the rest
of this paper.
The traditional BMVDR BF [10, 11] consists of two fil-
ters designed to preserve the target signal as received by the
reference microphone in each HA, while minimizing the out-
put interferer-plus-noise power. To be specific, taking the left
HA as an example, the filter coefficientw L can be obtained by
solving the convex problem:
ˆwL = arg min
wL
wH
L RwL s.t.w H
L a=a L,(2)
whereˆwL is the estimate ofwL,Ris the SCM of the interferer-
plus-noise component, superscript(·) H denotes the Hermitian
transpose, anda L is the ATF from the target source to the ref-
erence microphone at the left HA. Based on the Lagrange mul-
tiplier method [36],ˆwL can be obtained in closed form, which
enables fast computation of the enhanced signalˆwH
L y. In open-
fit HAs, using BMVDR BF introduces two main issues:
(1) Acoustic Leakage.Assume that an error microphone is
placed deep inside the ear canal1, its received signal in the STFT
domain can be modeled as
eL =g L·ˆwH
L y+d L,(3)
whered L is the acoustic leakage signal in the left HA, and
gL represents the secondary path, i.e., the ATF from the loud-
speaker to the error microphone in the left HA. The interferer-
plus-noise component ind L inevitably degrades the output
signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR), while the target
speech component ind L interacts withˆwH
L yand may introduce
unpleasant artifacts such as comb filtering [37].
(2) Speech Distortion.In practice, the ground truth of the ATF
ais unavailable to the BMVDR BF. As a result, ATF estimation
errors lead to a mismatch in the constraint of (2), which in turn
causes distortion of both the target speech and the spatial cues.
In addition, the SCMRis subject to estimation errors, which
degrades the noise reduction performance.
To tackle the above issues, this work designs a data-driven
post-filter for the BMVDR BF, which is mathematically de-
scribed by the mappingF(·):
F(ˆwH
L y,y L)7→−d L/gL +a Ls (4)
wherey L denotes the signal received by the reference micro-
phone of the left HA. Clearly, the first term aims to cancel the
leakage signal, whereas the second term compensates for the
distortion in the BMVDR outputˆwH
L y. Here, to generate high-
quality anti-leakage “−d L/gL”, the noisy reference signaly L
is also fed into the model as an auxiliary input, so as to prevent
excessive noise suppression in the BMVDR BF.
1 The error microphone is primarily employed during the signal
modeling and model training phases, thereby substantially alleviating
the strict dependency on real-time error feedback during inference and
deployment.
5177
iSTFT
STFTSTFTBMVDR
Concat. X U
Encoder
F-TDL Block
ConvAtt Block
 Anti-leakage
Clean Speech
Secondary
Path
Error Mic.
Leakage
SignalLoudspeaker
Feature Augmentation
LNN
×L
C×F×T
C×F×TC×F×T
Deconder
Reference
Mic. signal
C×F×T
C×F×T
(a) Overview of ABSE-NET
Layer Norm Layer Norm
RMB-Conv1D
C-RMB-Conv1D
Group Norm + SiLU
RMB-Conv1D
C-RMB-Conv1D
Linear + SiLU
Linear + SiLU
Linear
Linear + SiLU
Linear + SiLU
(b) Frequency-Time Dependency Learning (F-TDL) Block
Frequency Dependency Learning
Time Dependency Learning
AVG Pooling
Linear + SiLU
Linear + Sigmoid
Channel Attention
C×F×T
C×F×T
Linear + Sigmoid
Linear + SiLU
Linear
Linear
AVG Pooling
Eq.(11)
Frequency-Time Attention
(c) Convolutional Attention (ConvAtt) Block
All Mic.
Figure 2:Proposed ABSE-NET: (a) Overview of ABSE-NET, (b) Architecture of F-TDL block, (c) Architecture of ConvAtt block.
3. Proposed Method
ABSE-NET operates independently on the left and right HAs.
For brevity, only the left-HA pipeline is illustrated in Figure
2, while the right-HA pipeline follows analogously. First, the
BMVDR BF performs coarse BSE in the STFT domain, and
its outputˆwH
L yis concatenated with the noisy reference sig-
naly L to complement the target estimate with sufficient noise
information retained in the raw reference and then fed into the
LNN. The LNN consists of an encoder for feature extraction, a
feature augmentation (FA) module, and a decoder that maps the
augmented features back to the STFT domain. Finally, the out-
put of LNN is transformed in the time domain, emitted by the
loudspeaker, and propagated through the secondary pathg L to
the ear canal where it destructively interferes with the leakage
signal.
Symbol Definition.The inputX∈R 4×F×T of LNN is
formed by concatenating the real and imaginary parts of both
ˆwH
L yandy L, whereFandTdenote the numbers of frequency
bins and time frames, respectively. The encoder then extracts
the latent featureH∈R C×F×T fromX, whereCis the fea-
ture dimension. The FA module produces an augmented feature
A∈R C×F×T , which is transformed to the STFT-domain sig-
nalU∈R 2×F×T through the decoder. The outputUof de-
coder is first transformed into the time domain and then propa-
gated through the secondary path, yielding final outputˆu.
Model Details.The BMVDR BF has been detailed in Section
2. For the LNN, the encoder employs a single convolutional
layer with RMB-Conv1D kernels without identity branches (see
subsection 3.1 for details of RMB-Conv1D), while the de-
coder adopts a fully connected (FC) layer to project the high-
dimensional deep features back to the complex spectral dimen-
sion. The remaining FA module is repeatedLtimes to progres-
sively augment the feature representation through hierarchical
abstraction, each consisting of an F-TDL block and a ConvAtt
block, whose technical details are described in the following
subsections.
Loss Function.We define the loss function as
L=−SI-SDR(ˆu,u)−λ·STOI(ˆu,u),(5)
whereudenotes the clean speech serving as the ground-truth
target andλis a hyperparameter that controls the relative contri-
bution of signal reconstruction quality and perceptual intelligi-
bility. SI-SDR(·)stands for scale-invariant signal-to-distortion
ratio [38], designed to optimize waveform reconstruction qual-
ity, by measuring the ratio between the target component and
the residual distortion while being invariant to global gain scal-
ing, and STOI(·)represents short-time objective intelligibility
[39], utilized to enhance speech intelligibility by maximizing
the short-time correlation between the temporal envelopes of
clean and processed speech in one-third octave bands.
3.1. F-TDL Block
Speech signals are produced by the periodic vibration of the
vocal folds and are subsequently modulated by the vocal tract
[40], which results in inherent frequency-time dependencies.
The frequency dependencies stem from: (a) the concentration
of speech energy around the fundamental frequency and its har-
monics; and (b) the spectral leakage in the STFT domain due
to the windowing operation [41, 42, 43]. The time dependen-
cies arise from: (a) the short-time quasi-periodicity in the time
domain; and (b) the inter-frame convolution caused by room
impulse responses longer than the frame length [44, 45, 46].
By exploiting these frequency-time dependencies, state-of-the-
art approaches have achieved significant performance improve-
ments in several speech processing tasks [47, 48]. However,
most of them rely on computationally intensive attention mech-
anisms, such as multi-head self-attention in [48], which makes
them ill-suited for deployment in HA platforms. To this end,
5178
we design the F-TDL block, which consists of two sub-blocks:
a frequency dependency learning (FDL) sub-block and a time
dependency learning (TDL) sub-block.
Frequency Dependency Learning Sub-block.This sub-
block aims to learn the frequency-dependent information by
processing each time frame independently, i.e., weights are
shared across time frames. As shown in the left part of Fig-
ure 2 (b), the FDL sub-block adopts a residual structure [49] to
mitigate the vanishing gradient problem and stabilize the learn-
ing dynamics during deep feature extraction. This sub-block
consists of layer normalization (LN) followed by a combina-
tion of linear (or linear+SiLU) layers and RMB-Conv1D lay-
ers. LN is applied per sample over all dimensions, ensuring that
the normalization is robust to the signal’s internal variance and
independent of the batch size. Specifically, three linear layers
form a bottleneck structure that compresses the feature dimen-
sion fromCtoC 1 and then expands it back toC, where the
first and third linear layers are followed by the SiLU nonlinear
activation functions [50], whose smooth and non-monotonic na-
ture helps prevent the dying neuron problem commonly encoun-
tered in standard ReLU. The RMB-Conv1D layer applies repa-
rameterized multi branch one-dimensional convolution (RMB-
Conv1D) [51] along the frequency dimension, which employs
multi-scale convolutions during training and fuses them into a
single kernel at inference. In this work, we define three ker-
nel sizesK={q 1,q 2,q 3}withq 1 < q2 < q3. Then, in the
training stage, the outputY train of RMB-Conv1D layer can be
formulated as
Ytrain =Ψ+
X
q∈K
P(Ψ,r q),(6)
whereΨ∈R C×F is the input feature,P(·)denotes the depth-
wise convolution, andr q is the convolution kernel withqbeing
the kernel size. During the inference stage, the outputY inf er
can be obtained by fusing the multi-scale convolutions in (6)
into a single convolution, i.e.,
Yinf er =P(Ψ,r)(7)
whererdenotes the fused convolution kernel, which can be
calculated by
r=r q3 +Z(r q2) +Z(r q1) +r I,(8)
whereZ(·)denotes zero-padding alignment to the maximum
kernel sizeq 3, andr I represents the convolution kernel trans-
formed from the first term in (6). We can conclude from (7)
that only a single convolution kernel is required during infer-
ence stage, while achieving the same modeling capacity as the
multi-scale convolutional structure in (6). In addition, the FDL
sub-block avoids computationally expensive multi-head atten-
tion mechanisms, enabling efficient deployment on HAs.
Time Dependency Learning Sub-block.This sub-block aims
to learn the time-dependent information, i.e., weights are shared
across all frequency bins. As illustrated in the right part of Fig-
ure 2 (b), the TDL sub-block also adopts a residual structure,
which is composed of LN followed by a combination of lin-
ear+SiLU layers, C-RMB-Conv1D layers, and a group normal-
ization (GN) layer with SiLU activation. LN is applied per sam-
ple over all dimensions. The C-RMB-Conv1D layer replaces
the standard convolution in the RMB-Conv1D layer with causal
convolution to enhance the real-time capability of the model by
strictly restricting the receptive field to past and present frames,
thus preventing any reliance on future look-ahead. Instead of
using a bottleneck structure, the feature dimension is first ex-
panded fromCtoC 2 via a linear+SiLU layer, refined by C-
RMB-Conv1D and GN+SiLU, and finally projected back toC
with another linear+SiLU layer. This design is motivated by the
higher complexity of temporal dependencies in speech signals,
which are consequently modeled in a higher-dimensional fea-
ture space, thereby preventing the loss of fine-grained tempo-
ral dynamics that might occur in a compressed representation.
Owing to the use of C-RMB-Conv1D layers, the TDL sub-block
maintains a lightweight design while ensuring causality for real-
time processing.
3.2. ConvAtt Block
To further refine the features extracted by the F-TDL mod-
ule, we cascade a ConvAtt block after it. To reduce computa-
tional complexity, inspired by [52], the ConvAtt sequentially in-
fers attention maps along two separate dimensions, namely the
channel dimension and the frequency–time dimension, which
avoids the prohibitive computational costs associated with com-
puting full 3D attention tensors, making it highly suitable for
lightweight edge deployment. Then, the attention maps are ap-
plied to the input feature for adaptive feature refinement.
Channel Attention Sub-block.This sub-block is constructed
to produce a channel attention map by exploiting the inter-
channel features, which can be formulated as
Φ′ =M C(Φ)⊙Φ,(9)
whereΦ∈R C×F×T andΦ′∈R C×F×T represent the input
and output, respectively,M C(Φ)∈R C×1×1 is the channel
attention map, and⊙denotes the element-wise multiplication
with broadcasting. As shown in the left part of Figure 2 (c), the
channel attention sub-blockM C(·)consists of a global pool-
ing operation over the frequency–time dimensions, followed
by a linear+SiLU layer and a linear+Sigmoid layer. The lin-
ear+SiLU layer compresses the feature dimension toC 3, while
the linear+Sigmoid layer, a linear layer followed by a Sigmoid
activation [53], projects the features back to the original dimen-
sionC. This design incurs a small number of parameters and
therefore maintains a lightweight nature.
Frequency-Time Attention Sub-block.This sub-block
produces a frequency-time attention map by exploiting the
frequency-time features, which can be formulated as
A=M F T(Φ′)⊙Φ ′,(10)
whereM F T(Φ′)∈R 1×F×T is the frequency-time attention
map. As shown in the right part of Figure 2 (c),M F T(·)con-
sists of four linear layers (including a linear+SiLU layer and a
linear+Sigmoid layer) and an average pooling layer. Mathemat-
ically, it can be formulated as
MF T(Φ′) = [1−α·ρ(Φ ′)·G(Φ ′)],(11)
whereG(Φ′)∈R 1×F×T andρ(Φ′)∈R 1×1×1 are two inter-
mediate variables, andαis a hyperparameter. On the one hand,
G(Φ′)is obtained by passingΦ ′ through three linear layers.
Specifically, the first linear+SiLU layer compresses the chan-
nel dimension toC 4, the second linear layer projects it back to
C, and the third linear+Sigmoid layer further reduces the chan-
nel dimension to1. On the other hand,ρ(Φ ′)is computed by
passingΦ′ through a linear layer followed by an average pool-
ing layer. The linear layer compresses the channel dimension
5179
Table 1:Comparison of computational efficiency, speech quality, and spatial cue preservation on the test set. Note: “M” and “G”
denote millions and gigas, respectively; the best results are highlighted in bold, and the second-best results are underlined.
Method Para.(M) FLOPs(G) SI-SDR(dB) PESQ STOI CSIG CBAK COVL∆ILD∆IPD
Unprocessed – – -2.781 1.609 0.775 2.223 1.734 1.868 – –
BMVDR w/o AL – – 5.216 3.437 0.929 4.020 3.343 3.698 4.375 0.391
BMVDR – – 0.878 2.196 0.861 2.670 2.266 2.424 4.054 0.351
FxMWF – – 3.723 3.181 0.925 3.791 3.173 3.325 3.998 0.327
DeepANC 19.683 5.817 2.683 2.449 0.854 3.414 2.827 2.953 3.690 0.302
ASE-TM 3.224 14.41710.453.573 0.953 4.212 3.7444.071 3.121 0.242
ABSE-NET0.112 0.1849.869 3.626 0.955 4.6553.578 4.169 3.0470.251
(a)
(c)
 (d)
(b)
Figure 3:Visualization of waveforms and spectrograms across different signal processing stages: (a) Clean, (b) Unprocessed, (c)
BMVDR w/o AL, (d) ABSE-NET.
to 1, while the average pooling layer reduces the frequency-
time dimension to 1. Similar to the channel attention sub-
block, the frequency-time attention sub-block still maintains the
lightweight nature.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setups
Dataset.The clean speech and noise signals were obtained
from the Librispeech dataset [54] and the NOISEX-92 dataset
[55], respectively. Head-related impulse responses (HRIRs)
were derived from the Hearpiece database [56], which provides
three external microphones, as well as an in-ear microphone
acting as the error microphone. From this database, we se-
lected HRIRs correspo