Do speech foundation models really learn words?
Robin Huo1, Ewan Dunbar 1
1 University of Toronto, Canada
robin.huo@mail.utoronto.ca, ewan.dunbar@utoronto.ca
Abstract
Self-supervised speech foundation models are now used in a
wide array of downstream applications, including traditional
speech recognition and as the basis for tokens in speech-aware
language models. Attempts to understand their usefulness have
largely focused on probing their representations’ ability to dis-
criminate phonemes and words. However, discriminative ability
for words need not imply specialized representation of words
per se. Good discrimination of words may be explained by
good encoding of word form (phonemes) rather than form-
independent word representations encoding identity or syntac-
tic/semantic properties. By partialling out phoneme information
using residualization, we show that, in later layers, HuBERT
and wav2vec 2.0 do in general learn representations which en-
code words with reasonable fidelity independently of local pho-
netic content. We show that this simple approach to disentangle-
ment can enhance higher-order linguistic information in word
discovery tasks.
Index Terms: speech foundation models, interpretability
1. Introduction
Speech foundation models based on self-supervised learning
(S3M) now form the foundation of approaches for various
speech-related downstream tasks [1]. The success of S3Ms,
similar to the success of large language models, is generally un-
derstood to imply that success on the prediction task demands
that the learner construct abstract representations correspond-
ing to a latent structure for language, in much the same way
that simple contextual word embeddings discover lexical se-
mantics. As such, a number of probing studies have been in-
terpreted to mean that these models learn representations that
encode phonemes, speakers, and words [2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
However, success in probing “words,” in the sense of mere
word identity, is difficult to interpret. A token of a word likecat
is both an instance of a bundle of syntactic and semantic fea-
tures (a noun referring to a fuzzy four-legged animal) as well as
an instance of the sequence of phonemes /kæt/. In Saussure’s
[7] terms, it is an instance of both the signified and the signifier.
Since it seems clear that trained S3M representations are highly
discriminative of phonemes, successful probes of word iden-
tity [8] could be explained away by models’ ability to discrim-
inate phonemes. Although some work has found correlation
with text-based word vectors [9], as well as part-of-speech and
semantic tags [3], the ability to predict this richer lexical infor-
mation is not a decisive sign that models learn anything beyond
than phonological form: a representation encoding phonologi-
cal form allows words to be identified (mostly) uniquely, and
properties of words can be predicted from word identity.
Choi et al. [10] attempted to address this by compar-
ing near-homophones with synonyms, with synonyms showing
much weaker cosine similarities, suggesting partial but gener-
ally weak encoding of non-phonological (“signified”) proper-
ties of words. This result suffers from an issue common to
studies using cosine similarities, and, more generally, any sim-
ilarity calculated indiscriminately over representational dimen-
sions: information can be “drowned out” by irrelevant dimen-
sions, even if it is represented with high fidelity on a subspace.
Nevertheless, the result is consistent with the fact that S3Ms lag
behind text-based models in semantic-based tasks [11].
This study takes a simple residualization approach to exam-
ining the question of whether English-pretrained HuBERT and
wav2vec 2.0 models encode non-phonological lexical informa-
tion. We use a linear classifier, rather than a global similarity-
based approach, predicting word identity at the frame level
without pooling, similar to Pasad et al. [3]. We then remove
a component of the representation that encodes phonological
information. We demonstrate that, while much of the ability
to identify words indeed disappears from the resulting residu-
alized representations, in most cases, later layers are still pre-
dictive of word identity. We conclude that information is inte-
grated from the surrounding context, essentially creating a “to-
ken” that allows for words to be identified locally at any frame
throughout the word. While this does not tell us whether and
how much lexical semantic or syntactic information is encoded,
we demonstrate that the representations encode word informa-
tion that goes beyond encoding diphones or triphones.
2. Related methods
We take a simple residualization approach to “subtracting” in-
formation from S3M representations for the purposes of inter-
pretation. This approach involves the estimation of a linear
function predicting the embedding features given target labels,
and subtraction of this function’s predicted embeddings from
the true embeddings to yield residualized embeddings where
information about the targets has been linearly removed. In our
case, the function predicts embedding features given categorical
phoneme labels, and thus the residualization step can roughly be
seen as subtracting phoneme-level means. This intervention on
model features enables direct experimental investigation of the
contribution of a given kind of information to model behaviour
on downstream tasks or probes that are fundamentally linear.
Toneva et al. [12] used a similar method to remove context-
independent word token contributions to contextual ELMo em-
beddings and evaluated the resulting residualized text embed-
dings against alignment with brain imaging data; Oota et al.
[13] performed a similar analysis with BERT [14]. Oota et al.
[15] evaluated a wider variety of text models and extended this
analysis to speech models wav2vec 2.0 [16] and Whisper [17].
5477
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2676
This approach can in principle lead to errors in both di-
rections: failure to fully remove phoneme information when it
is present, and removal of more than just phoneme informa-
tion. Our primary concern is the first, as, for the purposes of
our experiment, removing “too much” information would only
strengthen our conclusion. We discuss how we address these is-
sues in Section 3, and demonstrate in Section 4 that the method
is largely effective in removing phoneme information.
Two alternatives stand out. Many disentanglement methods
work by building parallel representations which are expressly
designed to modularly specialize in predicting a specific kind
of information such as rhythm [18]. This is not appropriate for
our goal, which is to understand and make use of existing rep-
resentations which were not in general trained in such a way.
The approach taken by [19] to remove known factors from
S3M representations for the purposes of interpretation is to
identify “subspaces” which appear to encode (for example)
speaker information, and then collapse the corresponding axes
out of the representations. However, the axes found are not true
subspaces per se. Instead, the method finds axes and associates
an “importance” score to each, ostensibly measuring the amount
of information about the factor encoded on the given dimension.
There are two problems with this approach. First, it requires se-
lecting some arbitrary number of dimensions to remove that is,
in general, strictly less than the representation dimension. Sec-
ond, it requires that we select an appropriate importance score.
While [19] used explained variance across factor levels, vari-
ance is not a full substitute for information, and thus does not
guarantee that we have removed factor information. A variety of
alternative methods exist for assigning importance to a dimen-
sion with respect to some factor (e.g., [20]), but the question of
which to use in this context, if any, has not been explored.
3. Method
We analyze representations from the final convolutional layer
and each of the 12 transformer layers of the base variants of the
SSL speech models HuBERT [21] and wav2vec 2.0 [16], using
the pre-trained checkpoints available from the fairseq reposi-
tory.1 We evaluate on the dev-clean split of LibriSpeech (En-
glish) [22]. Following [8, 9], we use alignments to associate
each frame with a gold phoneme (42 categories, 3 being non-
speech/silence) and word label (8217 words + 1 silence cate-
gory), and probe these frames using a softmax classifier. Before
residualization and probing, we scale and center model repre-
sentations to zero mean and unit variance. Past work suggests
this transformation does not harm encoding of phoneme or word
information, and may in fact enhance it [23]. Although these
representations are standardized, we refer to them henceforth as
“raw”, to contrast them with the residualized representations.
We measure word identity classification accuracy and as-
sess the effect of residualizing out a factor corresponding to
phonemic information. We test four variants: phonemes; di-
phones, both left- and right-hand; and triphones. That is,
for a given frame, we residualize out the phoneme (or di-
phone/triphone) corresponding to that frame, and use the result-
ing representation as the input to the word probe. To perform
the residualization, we estimate a ridge regression predicting in-
dividual representation frames from a one-hot encoding of the
factor (phoneme, left-diphone, right-diphone, or triphone). We
select the weight decay coefficient α by searching over values
1https://github.com/facebookresearch/fairseq/
blob/main/examples/hubert/README.md
logarithmically ranging between 1 and 0.0001. Our goal is ef-
fectively to estimate the mean for each factor level, with a small
amount of regularization. We then subtract the predictions of
the regression. In estimating the regression models, we exclude
any examples of phonemes, diphones, or triphones which cor-
respond exactly to, or properly contain, the complete word cor-
responding to that frame. Frames labelled with phoneme cate-
gories corresponding to non-speech (SIL, SP, SPN) are retained
when estimating the residualization models and discarded when
analyzing results.
We train and evaluate a linear probe predicting word iden-
tity with frames as input using five-fold cross-validation. To
validate the method and ensure that phoneme information is
not recoverable linearly after the residualization procedure, we
evaluate a linear probe predicting phoneme identity.
4. Results
Table 1 shows the results of the validation experiment (probe
predicts phoneme rather than word identity). Results are accu-
racies averaged over five cross-validation folds. As can be seen,
the residualization method is successful in making it substan-
tially more difficult for the linear probe to classify individual
phonemes. (The most common phoneme label has a relative
frequency of 11.6%; we discuss the fact that the method falls
short of reaching chance level in Section 8 below.) We also in-
clude an ablation without the standardization step. The results
show that this step is necessary, presumably because the shape
of the distribution is not matched across phonemes, which can
be exploited for classification. In the main experiment we al-
ways include the standardization step.
Figure 1 shows the results of the main experiment, divided
by layer and by word length, with HuBERT in the upper panel
and wav2vec 2.0 below. We observe that residualizing out
phonemes does not change the overall pattern seen in the raw
representations: little ability to classify words in the last con-
volutional layer, and a sharp increase in the transformer lay-
ers peaking in layers 9 and 10 (HuBERT) or layers 7 and 8
(wav2vec 2.0) at somewhat more than 90% accuracy. Remov-
ing diphones decreases accuracy slightly more in earlier layers,
across both models.
Removing triphones decreases accuracy substantially ex-
cept in layers 9 and 10 (HuBERT) and 7 and 8 (wav2vec 2.0),
where it shows a mixed picture. While there is a substantial
drop in the ability to classify words of lengths 3–6, the perfor-
mance is still well above the baseline obtained by picking the
modal word by length (length 3: 14.9%; 4: 0.4%; 5: 0.1%;
6:≪ 0.1%) or by triphone (50.3%). Thus, in some layers, the
probe’s ability to classify words is not merely a reflection of an
encoding of short sequences of phonemes: the model encodes
words partly independently of local phonological information.2
It is also worth noting that although the residualization does
not completely reduce phonemic information to chance level as
measured by a linear probe, the fact that Figure 1 shows signif-
icant differences where Table 1 shows largely uniform perfor-
mance in the medial layers strongly suggests that the phoneme
probe and word probe are leveraging different information.
2At least for diphones and triphones, the fact that we did not include
examples that contain full words when fitting the ridge regression is im-
portant here. When we include them, performance drops substantially
on words of length ≤ 2 and 3 respectively. This is because in some
cases the regression is fit to “triphones” which are also words.
5478
Table 1: Accuracy of a linear probe trained to predict phonemes from HuBERT and wav2vec 2.0 representations: raw, residualized
from phoneme labels as in the paper , and residualized without standardization.
Model Features Conv 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
HuBERT Raw 0.46 0.70 0.72 0.75 0.77 0.82 0.84 0.85 0.86 0.86 0.87 0.87 0.87
Residual 0.78 0.48 0.34 0.29 0.29 0.29 0.29 0.28 0.27 0.28 0.27 0.29 0.36
Res. w/o std. 1.00 0.97 0.90 0.77 0.75 0.80 0.71 0.76 0.70 0.58 0.55 0.68 0.82
wav2vec 2.0 Raw 0.51 0.72 0.75 0.78 0.81 0.83 0.84 0.84 0.84 0.85 0.84 0.74 0.74
Residual 0.35 0.32 0.29 0.28 0.28 0.27 0.26 0.27 0.27 0.28 0.29 0.60 0.51
Res. w/o std. 1.00 0.89 0.72 0.68 0.71 0.67 0.57 0.58 0.53 0.66 0.77 0.98 0.99
Figure 1: Accuracy (percent) of a linear probe predicting word identity from HuBERT (upper) and wav2vec 2.0 (lower) representations.
5. Word discovery
To test whether the linear removal of phonemic information
from S3M representations can benefit tasks which rely on en-
coding of higher-level linguistic information, we residualize
phoneme target information out of the hidden representations
and evaluate the performance on unsupervised word segmen-
tation and clustering. We use HuBERT since its performance
was better in the previous experiment. We follow the method
of [24]: a word boundary detection algorithm [3] followed by
k-means clustering into hypothesized word categories.
We perform this evaluation on LibriSpeech dev-clean and
produce residualized phoneme representations using labels
from the same alignments used in Section 3, for the ninth layer
of HuBERT-base. We use this layer because it was found by
[8] to display the strongest alignment with word information,
and it is commonly used when training higher iterations on tar-
gets from HuBERT-base embeddings [21, 25]. Following [24],
we fixk = 13967 in the clustering step for evaluation on Lib-
riSpeech. The boundary detection step algorithm uses two hy-
perparameters, a window size and a prominence threshold for
peak detection over dissimilarity between adjacent S3M frames,
for which we perform grid search (window size: 3–8 in incre-
ments of 1; prominence threshold 0–1 in increments of 0.05).
Table 2: Word discovery performance with HuBERT-base rep-
resentations from layer 9, before and after residualization.
Hypers Features NED ↓ F1↑ R↑
Malan et al. [24] Raw .508 .162 .513
− Phoneme .463 .169 .513
− Diphone-L .490 .162 .506
− Diphone-R .474 .160 .502
− Triphone .556 .136 .474
Best NED (for Raw) Raw .443 .175 .249
− Phoneme .439 .178 .258
− Diphone-L .475 .166 .241
− Diphone-R .474 .169 .236
− Triphone .561 .138 .159
BestR (for Raw) Raw .527 .166 .531
− Phoneme .478 .175 .537
− Diphone-L .500 .161 .522
− Diphone-R .505 .155 .511
− Triphone .572 .124 .467
5479
The results are evaluated according to the true word bound-
aries and types defined by the alignments, with a 20 ms toler-
ance for boundary placement. Boundary quality is measured by
token F1-score, which describes how many of the true word
tokens were correctly segmented (bounded correctly on both
sides), andR-value, which captures the distance from the ideal
operating point of perfect recall on boundary placement (hit-
rate) and zero oversegmentation [26]. The quality of the discov-
ered lexicon is measured by normalized edit distance (NED),
which is the average Levenshtein distance between the phone-
mic transcriptions (according to the gold alignments) of each
token pair within a discovered word class, normalized by the
length of the longest transcription.
Table 2 shows the results across several hyperparameter set-
tings. Residualization from phoneme targets improves NED,
tokenF1 andR-value, reflecting more accurate word segmen-
tation and clustering after the removal of phoneme information.
This improvement is robust across segmentation hyperparam-
eter settings, which is important in particular for the task of
unsupervised lexicon discovery as it aims to address low- or
zero-resource circumstances in which there may be very little
language data available to facilitate hyperparameter tuning. It
should be noted, however, that to directly use our approach re-
quires aligned phonemic labels, which are not typically avail-
able in practice. These results should thus be viewed not as an
indication of practical performance, but as a validation of the
core insight that direct removal of phonemic information may
enhance the accessibility of other information.
Residualization from diphones and triphones, unlike residu-
alization from phonemes, degrades segmentation performance.
Since phoneme transition probabilities are predictive of word
boundaries [27], it is likely that any encoding of local phonemic
context aids segmentation irrespective of non-formal encoding
of words themselves, and the removal of such information can
thus harm segmentation performance as observed here.
6. Discussion
This experiment demonstrates that, in later layers, HuBERT and
wav2vec 2.0 construct representations (that are predictive) of
words and which are fairly robust to the erasure of informa-
tion about phonemes or short sequences of phonemes. While it
does not tell us what the model encodes about words, it strongly
suggests that it treats them as units. This is consistent with
the results of [3] that several S3Ms can be used to reconstruct
word boundaries and, to some degree, higher-order properties
of words. The novelty of our study is to remove the confound
caused by the fact that the model also encodes local phonemic
content and context, which is likely to be strongly predictive of
word identity due to the Saussurean duality of words.
We limited our residualization to phoneme sequences of
length≤ 3 in order to avoid the unreliable regression model
fits that would result from moving to higher-order n-grams. It
is both possible and plausible that the model integrates con-
text from much longer distances—enough for a linear probe
to predict word identity—but still does not construct context-
independent representations of specific words per se. Given that
HuBERT is trained to predict masks spanning at least 10 frames
(200 ms), which includes many full words, the fact that enough
context is integrated to identify a word might seem like a trivial
property that follows from the loss. However, given an average
phoneme duration of around 65 ms, a single masked span con-
tains only around 3 phonemes. Furthermore, the prediction tar-
gets are derived from clustering individual, contextless frames.
It would have been entirely possible, therefore, for the model to
construct representations that are predictive of local phonemic
context only. In spite of this, they predict words, even quite long
ones, with fairly high accuracy.
Our simple residualization approach largely succeeds in re-
moving representations’ ability to predict individual phonemes
while maintaining their ability to predict word identity. In many
situations, this is likely to be useful for enhancing higher-level
information and reducing the influence of local phonological in-
formation. Clearly, as Figure 1 demonstrates, linear probing is
not one of those situations: the raw representations already per-
form well on the word identity probe. However, as we show,
lexicon discovery does benefit from phoneme residualization.
This demonstrates the importance of complementing probing
tasks with more complex downstream tasks.
7. Summary of contributions
We have shown that HuBERT and wav2vec 2.0, pre-trained on
English, encode substantial information about word identity (or
sufficient to reconstruct word identity) locally, within the frames
aligned with a given word. While previous studies have reached
similar conclusions, our study clearly dissociates the encoding
of words from the encoding of phonological form: encoding of
local phonological features does not fully explain these S3Ms’
ability to distinguish words. The result underscores the need to
understand why self-supervised learning is so effective in un-
covering word information from speech, and what the limita-
tions of these representations are, in particular in light of the
serious gap between text and discrete speech units derived from
S3Ms in unsupervised tasks such as lexicon discovery [28] and
textless language modelling [29]. A straightforward application
of our result improves performance in word discovery.
8. Limitations
The greatest limitation of our findings towards practical applica-
tion is the need for aligned phonemic labels, which are not eas-
ily available in most tasks. Future work may investigate ways
to apply these insights using approximate or inferred labels, ob-
viating the need for precise phonemic alignments.
Additionally, as described in Section 3, we excluded frames
for which the corresponding phoneme/diphone/triphone fully
contained the corresponding word when estimating the regres-
sion from phonemic factor labels to model embeddings. This
was done in order to avoid inadvertently residualizing out words
in addition to phonemic context, by restricting the input to the
regression model to cases where the predictor could not be con-
strued as constituting a word representation. In some cases, this
has an effect on the resulting probe accuracies. As shown in
Table 1, the phoneme accuracy after phoneme residualization
remains above chance level (relative frequency of the modal
phoneme is 11.6%), suggesting that this method fails to fully
remove phoneme identity information. However, if we esti-
mate the regression without the exclusion policy just described,
the resulting phoneme residuals succeed in removing almost all
phoneme information (accuracy below 16%) for layers 1–10
of HuBERT and wav2vec 2.0. This means that including the
frames corresponding to monophonemic words in the regres-
sion is essential to full linear removal of phoneme information.
One potential reason is that some phoneme is overrepresented
as a monophonemic word versus as a part of other words, and
the exclusion of monophonemic words thus disproportionately
hurts the model estimation for that phoneme.
5480
9. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engi-
neering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) RGPIN-2022-
04431, the Data Sciences Institute, and the Linguistics Grad-
uate Research Award at the University of Toronto, as well as
resources provided by Compute Ontario, Calcul Qu ´ebec, and
the Digital Research Alliance of Canada.
10. Generative AI use disclosure
Generative AI was not used to produce this manuscript.
11. References
[1] A. Mohamed, H.-y. Lee, L. Borgholt, J. D. Havtorn, J. Edin,
C. Igel, K. Kirchhoff, S.-W. Li, K. Livescu, L. Maaløe, T. N.
Sainath, and S. Watanabe, “Se