Working Together on Technologies: A Case Study of Collaboration in Aotearoa
Ben Hutchinson ID 1,∗∗, Gabriella Conlon2, Greg Duncum3, Carrie Jones4, T¯ane Karamaina3,
Hautahi Kingi ID 5, Jamie Towler3, Caroline Rainsford4,∗, Ngahiwi Apanui-Barr3,∗
1 Google, Australia
2 Independent, Australia1
3 Te Taura Whiri i te Reo M¯aori, New Zealand
4 Google, New Zealand
5 Google, USA
benhutch@google.com
Abstract
Te reo M ¯aori (the M ¯aori language) has historically been
poorly served by technologies which English and other global
languages take for granted. One such class of technologies is
Text-to-Speech (TTS), which is used into a wide array of tech-
nology products. These range from screen readers which sup-
port accessibility, through to products which support hands- and
eyes-free use while driving, such as reading aloud driving direc-
tion guidance. This paper presents a case study of collaboration
on TTS technologies between Te Taura Whiri i te Reo M ¯aori
and Google. The former is a M ¯aori-led organisation, the latter
a global technology company. This case study focuses not on
technical implementation details, but rather on the challenges
in the partnership to mutual understanding and alignment, and
the processes we co-developed to overcome those challenges,
which led to the successful development of technology which
was satisfactory to both partners.
Index Terms: Text-To-Speech, M¯aori language
1. Introduction
Indigenous communities worldwide have long asserted their
unique connections to their ancestral lands and languages, and
demanded seats at the table in deciding the futures of both. This
must be done in ways which recognise and celebrate Indigenous
values and worldviews [1, 2, 3]. However it is only within the
last decade or so that technology journals and conferences have
recognised and embraced the relevance of these calls to tech-
nology development, e.g., [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. These
discussions have focused on a range of concerns, however a
common theme has been the repeated calling for technologists
to avoid the trap of focusing only on consequentialist goals—
risking self-perceptions as ‘saviours’ of languages [7, 9]—and
instead to focus more on adopting appropriate processes [13] in-
cluding a critical focus on methods which advance participation
and self-determination [14, 11].
Within this context, there are a handful of projects demon-
strating Indigenous control, most notably the projects of Papa
Reo, the technology arm of Te Hiku Media in northern
Aotearoa/New Zealand [15]. There is also a small but grow-
ing collection of case studies which demonstrate how Indige-
nous organisations have partnered with non-Indigenous ones to
advance Indigenous goals such as caring for Indigenous lands
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
1Work done while at Google, Singapore.
[16], revitalisation of Indigenous languages [17], or normali-
sation of Indigenised varieties of global languages [18]. One
theme that these projects emphasise is the critical importance
of partnerships which include Indigenous organisations.
This paper positions itself within this growing body of work
on technologies for Indigenous language revitalisation contexts
which are developed in partnership with Indigenous communi-
ties. It discusses a case study which addresses two questions
head on:Can an Indigenous organisation and a global tech-
nology company partner in ways which are mutually beneficial,
advancing their different goals and aspirations?And, if so,
how can this be done in ways which respect different value sys-
tems, historical contexts, and pragmatic constraints?This case
study advances our understanding of the practical challenges
such partnerships face on the ground, when two sets of cul-
tural norms meet and are sometimes in tension. And it presents
a set of artefacts and approaches which were codeveloped to
navigate these tensions. This paper has a structure that is not
traditional for research papers. It is structured around three
M¯aori concepts which played important roles in the partnership:
whakawhanaungatanga,manaakitangaandtauira.
2.Whakawhanaungatanga/ Relationships
“Kotahi mano kapu t ¯ı. ”(One thousand cups of
tea.)—Maori adage
Whakawhanaungatangarefers to the process of establish-
ing trusted partnerships,2 and this concept underpins M¯aori un-
derstandings of what it means to work together, including on an
R&D project [19, 20, 21]. It entails awareness of the unique
contribution that each partner brings to the relationship, shared
understanding, and actively committing to building a long term
relationship. With this in mind, we begin with a brief account
of the two partners and how they came to work together.
Te Taura Whiri i te Reo M¯aori (henceforth Te Taura Whiri)
is a M ¯aori-led organisation whose mission is to increase te reo
M¯aori use and speakers by revitalising, celebrating, and pro-
moting te reo M ¯aori. It has been operating for over 30 years,
with expertise in te reo M¯aori (M¯aori language) and te ao M¯aori
(M¯aori culture), recognising that te reo M¯aori is central to M¯aori
mana(identity and authority). Te Taura Whiri operates within
a complex social context in which the value of te reo M ¯aori
2Whakawhanaungatangaliterally means the process (-tanga) of cre-
ating (whaka-) family relationships (whanaunga). In this paper we pre-
fer non-literal translations which best capture the meaning of te reo
M¯aori words within the context of the partnership.
1705
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1573
to the New Zealand government and greater society has ebbed
and flowed [22]. At times the language has been actively sup-
pressed, its use forbidden in schools and punished by beatings
[23]. However since 1987 it has been an official language of
Aotearoa/New Zealand, and it is regarded by M¯aori as ataonga
(treasure).
Google is a global technology company with offices in
Aotearoa/New Zealand. It offers New Zealanders a wide range
of products that serve both global and local audiences. However
some of these have not always been adequately localised for the
local bilingual contexts. In particular, its voice-enabled prod-
ucts have centred the needs of English pronunciations but have
not adequately handled te reo M ¯aori words. This includes not
just common greetings such askia oraused by all New Zealan-
ders, but also the thousands of te reo M ¯aori place names in
widespread everyday use. On the text side, keyboard-enabled
products have similarly prioritised support for the Latin charac-
ters of New Zealand English, but have not always made it easy
to type the macron diacritic used to designate long vowels in the
standard te reo M¯aori orthography [24, 25].
Challenge 1: Building trustRepresentatives of the two or-
ganisations met in 2023 for their first metaphorical cup of tea at
PULiiMA, an Indigenous-led and Indigenous-majority confer-
ence held in Australia. Google’s demonstration of willingness
to listen in this Indigenous space helped in building connection.
The historical failures, summarised briefly above, by Google to
normalise te reo M ¯aori use in technology had been an ongoing
source of frustration for M¯aori organisations including Te Taura
Whiri. There was naturally scepticism as to whether technology
would improve. Additionally, the principle of Indigenous Data
Sovereignty is important to M¯aori communities [26], yet has not
always been respected by technology companies [27, 2].
Working together 1: Memorandum of UnderstandingOne
of the first steps to rebuilding trust and building a collaborative
relationship was to codevelop and sign a Memorandum of Un-
derstanding (MoU). This established in writing that the two or-
ganisations wished to establish a framework for collaboration
between them, and to set out potential areas and ongoing op-
portunities on which to collaborate. This MoU described ad-
dressing the speech- and text- product shortcomings described
above as being of mutual interest. For Google, addressing these
would improve technology products for Aotearoa/New Zealand.
For Te Taura Whiri, addressing these would help to normalise
correct te reo M¯aori usage and hence assist in its revitalisation.
Within this vision, the MoU called for better support for macron
diacritics on NZ keyboards, and Google delivered this in 2024.
The MoU also expressed a mission to improve speech-enabled
driving direction guidance: ‘development of a “New Zealand
TTS voice” that speaks English in a New Zealand accent and
can fluently pronounce te reo M¯aori place names.’
Challenge 2: Divergent relationship expectationsAn MoU
does not make a relationship, despite its role in signalling shared
intentions. All institutions have values and ways of doing things
that can become invisible to those who work there, as they be-
come normalised as part of the organisational culture. Despite
both organisations having processes for, and experience with,
working with external partners, it turned out our expectations
were quite different. For Google, the value of relationships is
that they enable projects which improve the technology. The
relationship facilitates the project. Within M ¯aori culture, rela-
tionships have greater importance in and of themselves. In a
Manaakitanga(Provides care and kindness)
Mutual recognition, care, and respect for each partner.
Acting with integrity and honesty, making the space safe for
each partner to raise and resolve issues.
Recognition & awareness of each partner’s unique contexts.
Trusting that each partner is present with the best intentions
and is committed to the partnership.
Whakawhanaungatanga(Commonality and inclusion)
Awareness of the unique contribution each partner brings to
the partnership and opportunities for future collaboration.
Actively committing to working together to achieve the goals
and objectives of the partnership agreement.
Allowing open communication and understanding.
Taunaki(Evidence)
Open to new ways of doing things and seeking continuous
improvement through evaluation.
Setting quality standards and striving to achieve them.
Ensuring we understand why we deliver in the way we do.
Figure 1: Kaupapa(principles) and their definitions in the En-
gagement Framework developed by the partnership.
sense, the shared technology project was playing a role in facil-
itating a relationship. These different values around relationship
led to project mis-steps and misunderstandings. Google initially
aimed to include Te Taura Whiri only at key decision points, and
thought that by doing so they were being respectful of the lat-
ter’s time and resources. Meanwhile, Te Taura Whiri perceived
this lack of inclusion as minimising their expertise and author-
ity, and not adequately respecting the relationship, resulting in
an obstacle for the collaboration. The CEO of Te Taura Whiri
was direct:‘we need to put our partnership into balance’.
Working together 2: Engagement FrameworkThe chal-
lenge described above was ultimately resolved through esca-
lation, driving alignment at a leadership level, andkanohi ki
te kanohi(face to face) meetings. Project team members from
Google met with leadership of Te Taura Whiri, who proposed
codeveloping an Engagement Framework to document shared
expectations regarding how to work together. This idea was
embraced by Google, recognising the mismatched expectations
and values. This led to an Engagement Framework structured
around three M ¯aorikaupapa(principles):manaakitanga(care
and kindness),whakawhanaungatanga(commonality and in-
clusion), andtaunaki(evidence) (see Figure 1). For each kau-
papa, the Framework listedtikanga(expressions), andtauira
(examples of good practice).
3.Manaakitanga/ Responsibility
‘Ko te reo te mauri o te mana M¯aori. ’(M¯aori lan-
guage is central to M ¯aori identity and authority.)
— Sir H¯emi H¯enare
Te ao M¯aori(M ¯aori culture) has been in Aotearoa since the
arrival of settlers from central Polynesia in the 14th Century
BCE. It places great value on relationships, both to other hu-
mans and to ancestral lands [28]. One way thatte reo M ¯aori
(M¯aori language) expresses those values is by giving names to
places which often have cultural and/or historical importance,
for example ¯Otamar¯akaumeans ‘the place of young warriors’.
The writing system of te reo M¯aori includes two digraphs whose
1706
pronunciations have regional variation (whandng). It has five
each of long vowels and short vowels, which are differentiated
in the standard modern orthography by macrons (e.g., ¯avsa),
but historically and in some regions today are differentiated by
repeated graphemes (e.g.,aavsa). Te reo M ¯aori orthography
plays important roles in language revitalisation and normalisa-
tion by helping learners and facilitating literacy programmes.
In contrast, global technology companies today are domi-
nated by Western, US, and English-centric ways of being and
doing. Their global position reproduces values—such as indi-
vidual liberty and the public sharing of cultural knowledge—
which can be traced back to European and American move-
ments known as the Enlightenment and the Reformation.
In this section, we discuss some of the challenges that these
differences in macro cultural-historical contexts played out in
practice in the context of the partnership.
Challenge 3: Distinct goalsA member of Te Taura Whiri ob-
served during a project meeting:‘the elephant in the room is the
potential extinction of M¯aori’. Although Google operates glob-
ally, product decisions about which languages to support are
typically made using metrics of how many people would bene-
fit. By this logic, product support for endangered languages has
low priority by virtue of their having fewer speakers. Language
technology companies valorise product usage, efficiency, and
scalability [29]. In contrast, the value of technologies to M ¯aori
organisations involved in revitalisation include: a) normalisa-
tion (making it easy to use te reo M ¯aori everywhere everyday);
b) reclamation (strengthening the connection of M¯aori commu-
nities to te reo M ¯aori) [30]; and c) differentiation (celebrating
the unique and special properties of te reo M ¯aori). These all
work towards ultimate goals of increasing te reo M¯aori use and
speakers.
Challenge 4: Disparate normative frameworksThe West-
ern normative frameworks adopted by global technology com-
panies tend to flatten the complexity of human existence. On
the one hand they tend towards atomism, centring the rights
of individuals in their policies and consent mechanisms, while
minimising collective rights such as those of families, tribes,
and communities. In parallel, they tend towards universalism,
promoting the shared global adoption of their policies without
local customisation, as required by their logics of efficiency
and scalability [31]. In contrast, M ¯aori and other Indigenous
normative frameworks tend to value local distinctions and dif-
ferentiations, as well as emphasising relationality and societal
structures [20, 32]. This difference in underlying values plays
out in different approaches to research and professional ethics.
Western organisations doing technology R&D place empha-
sis in their ethics charters on autonomy, beneficence, risks-vs-
benefits analyses, equality, and individual privacy. In contrast,
frameworks of M¯aori research ethics emphasise the importance
oftikanga(right ways of doing things),whakapapa(relation-
ships),tika(validity),manaakitanga(social responsibility), and
mana(justice and equity) [33]. These differences have led to
distinct approaches to AI Ethics (cf. [34] and [35]).
Challenge 5: Incompatible epistemologies of language
During one project meeting, a member of Te Taura Whiri ex-
plained‘speakers should demonstrate respect for thetaonga
[treasured nature] of the M ¯aori language’. This remark gets
to the heart of a deep epistemological difference. While M ¯aori
culture sees language as a treasure, technologists often see lan-
guage as a tool at best, although commonly simply as data
[36, 37, 38]. However language is a source ofmana, iden-
tity and culture for many Indigenous peoples [30], and intrin-
sically connected to land [39]. Te reo M ¯aori place names are
not arbitrary semiotic symbols, but rather maintain and sustain
M¯aori history, mythology, and culture [40, 41]. A member of
Te Taura Whiri explained that although te reo M¯aori words such
askia ora(hello) are commonly used in English sentences by
all New Zealanders, they will never ‘become’ English words.
This differs from English speakers’ understanding of their own
language, in which words like ‘shampoo’ may have originated
in other languages but have since become part of English. Be-
longing to te reo M ¯aori is insoluble:kupu(M ¯aori words) will
always be—and will only be—te reo M¯aori.
Challenge 6: Divergent metalinguistic normsBefore train-
ing the TTS model, we first needed to decide together as a team
what kind of person the model should sound like. This funda-
mental design decision would determine hiring of voice talents
who would be recorded, so that the TTS model could mimic
their voices. Some criteria were easy to agree on: the TTS
voice should sound like a person who speaks English with a
New Zealand accent and has excellent pronunciation of te reo
M¯aori. This agreement masked other concerns which took the
partnership a while to unpack. For Google, choosing the voice
talents was a normative yet empirical question which could be
decided by careful listening to decontextualised sample record-
ings by audio experts and linguists. Social concerns were min-
imised other than paying attention to the affability of the voice
recordings. However for Te Taura Whiri, selecting voice tal-
ents was a contextual and sociological matter, and had elements
of what might be called ‘virtue linguistics’. Rather than sim-
ply listening to recordings, it required finding speakers with the
right societal standings (cf. Tension 2 of [42]). This included
considering the speakers’ cultural backgrounds, relationships to
te reo M¯aori, and relationships to New Zealand communities—
and especially M ¯aori ones. This makes sense for a language
which had been suppressed and is being revitalised.
Challenge 7: Contrasting language ideologiesIn English-
speaking Western cultures, which centre written languages,
artefacts produced in a language have value and ownership.
However language in-and-of-itself is not owned. This con-
trasts with the principles of ICIP (Indigenous Cultural and In-
tellectual Property), which centre oral languages, and which
recognise value and ownership in language prior to the cre-
ation of artefacts [43]. While Western cultures recognise in-
dividual ownership of artefacts, M ¯aori culture recognises col-
lectivekaitiakitanga(guardianship) of te reo M ¯aori. Western
language ideologies—aided by centuries of language technolo-
gies including orthography, printing and computers [44]—tend
to aim towards linguistic standardisation [45]. In contrast, local
language variation is core to M¯aori identity [46].
Challenge 8: Different conceptions of accountabilityFor
Google, questions of quality assurance of technology are rooted
in the goals of driving product adoption. Quality assurance
centres evaluation and testing, and the overall outlook is opti-
mistic and opportunistic: the absence of testing failures gives
confidence that the technology will flourish. In our partner-
ship, Te Taura Whiri expressed a quite different outlook. Since
the M ¯aori people are guardians of te reo M ¯aori, one purpose
of quality assurance is cultural responsibility. Te Taura Whiri
centred concerns of governance rather than those of evaluation,
driven by a tempered outlook which did not see technology as
1707
an inevitable good, but instead as something that risked corrupt-
ing te reo M¯aori.
4.Tauira/ Examples of Practice
‘Ka tika a muri, ka tika a mua, ka rere pai ng ¯a
¯ahuatanga katoa.” (If all is in order in both front
and back, then all will go well.) — M¯aori proverb
In this section we give examples of how the partnership
navigated the challenges discussed in the previous section, jug-
gling legal, cultural, normative, and pragmatic considerations.
(In addition, Google worked with M ¯aori-led consultancy AU
Consulting on improving cultural competency.) The methods
which we developed to work together do not fully address the
scope of the challenges, but we hope they provide frameworks
which might be useful for future partnerships.
Working together 3: IP AgreementQuestions about how
to recognise M ¯aori data sovereignty arose from the start of
the project. An IP Agreement recognised Te Taura Whiri’s
guardianship of several te reo M ¯aori artefacts, including the te
reo M ¯aori pronunciation lexicon and te reo M ¯aori evaluation
data. Our hope is that they might be useful for other, M ¯aori-
led, projects building and evaluating TTS systems which either
speak te reo M ¯aori or, like ours, can pronounce English and
also te reo M¯aori place names. Google obtained a license to use
these artefacts for the purposes of developing the TTS system.
Working together 4: Alignment FrameworkTo work to-
gether with the challenges listed in the previous section, it
was necessary to find ways to put on the record disagreements
about ideal outcomes. For example, Te Taura Whiri wanted to
record their preference that any revenue from the New Zealand
TTS voice would contribute to te reo M ¯aori revitalisation pro-
grammes. This was impossible for Google to commit to, but
they did confirm there would be no intentional revenue gain di-
rectly attributable to the TTS voices. Together we co-developed
an Alignment Framework utilising an innovative Commitments
And Recorded Preferences (CARP) structure to navigate deci-
sions on sensitive topics. This documented not just mutually
acceptable outcomes but also each party’s ideal preferences,
ensuring all important desires regarding outcomes were voiced
and acknowledged, even when they could not be achieved.
Working together 5: Documenting language interactions
When challenges unique to te reo M ¯aori were encountered, in-
cluding ones relating to interactions between English and te reo
M¯aori, these were carefully recorded in a shared document.
These included a) interactions with the English apostrophe-s
clitic (attaching this clitic to te reo M ¯aori words violates the
official orthographic conventions, yet occurs in informal con-
texts), b) combining te reo M ¯aori and English words using a
hyphen, such as ‘iwi-approved’, c) te reo M¯aori-English homo-
graphs, such as ‘mate’, d) anglicisations of te reo M ¯aori which
have become normalised by the New Zealand Gazetteer, such
as ‘Petone’, based onPito-one.
Working together 6: Authentic recording scriptGoogle’s
development of a script for the voice talents to read treated lan-
guage as decontextualised. It contained sentences which were
grammatical but which might not make sense in the real world,
for example describing one town as being in a location inconsis-
tent with reality. The reasons for not caring about fidelity with
reality were due to seeing language as data, and in this case, the
partner’s goal was to produce a dataset of aligned speech and
text. Since Te Taura Whiri’s understanding of language was not
decontextualised data but connection to the world, they rewrote
sections of the recording script to be consistent with reality.
Working together 7: V oice talent selection and recording
Google relaxed its usual policy on strict anonymity when hiring
voice talents, to enable Te Taura Whiri to assess the talents’
relationships to te reo M¯aori and community. Both partners had
representatives present during the recording, to guarantee high
quality te reo M¯aori and New Zealand English pronunciations.
Working together 8: Robust pronunciation lexiconTTS
systems typically expect that inputs con