Cross-Modal Robustness Transfer (CMRT): Training Robust Speech
Translation Models Using Adversarial Text
Abderrahmane Issam1, Yusuf Can Semerci1, Jan Scholtes1, Gerasimos Spanakis1
1 Department of Advanced Computing Sciences, Maastricht University, The Netherlands
{abderrahmane.issam, y.semerci, j.scholtes, jerry.spanakis}@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Abstract
End-to-End Speech Translation (E2E-ST) has made significant
progress but often relies on curated datasets, overlooking chal-
lenges like robustness to inflectional morphology variations com-
mon in non-native and dialectal speech. In this work, we adapt
an adversarial attack targeting inflectional morphology from the
text domain to speech and demonstrate that E2E-ST models
are highly vulnerable. While adversarial fine-tuning improves
robustness in text, generating adversarial speech data is compu-
tationally difficult. To address this, we propose Cross-Modal
Robustness Transfer (CMRT), a method that transfers robustness
from text to the speech modality without requiring adversarial
speech data. Experiments across four language directions show
that CMRT improves adversarial robustness by over 3 BLEU
points on average while maintaining performance on clean data.
Index Terms: speech translation, adversarial attacks, robustness
1. Introduction
End-to-End Speech Translation (E2E-ST) has recently achieved
state-of-the-art results [1, 2], often outperforming cascaded ASR
and MT solutions [3, 4]. However, training and evaluation re-
main largely confined to curated datasets like MuST-C [5] and
CoV oST 2 [6]. These datasets fail to capture the morpholog-
ical complexities and fluency issues inherent in spontaneous,
non-native, or dialectal speech.
Non-native speech frequently exhibits non-standard inflec-
tional morphology [7, 8, 9]. While Machine Translation (MT)
research has addressed this via synthetic adversarial fine-tuning
[10, 11], E2E-ST models remain underexplored. This gap ex-
ists because generating high-quality synthetic adversarial speech
is resource-intensive and often requires high-fidelity Text-To-
Speech (TTS) systems for the source language.
We propose Cross-Modal Robustness Transfer (CMRT) to
bridge this gap. CMRT enables training robust E2E-ST models
using only adversarial text data, transferring robustness to the
speech modality. Our method relies on two stages: (1) training
an E2E-ST model with an aligned semantic space where speech
and text embeddings of the same word are closely mapped [12],
and (2) fine-tuning for robustness by injecting adversarial text
embeddings into the speech manifold (see Figure 1).
We evaluate CMRT across four language directions: En-De,
En-Ca, En-Ar, and Fr-En. English and French are particularly
relevant as their non-native speakers outnumber native speakers
by more than twofold [ 13]. Our results show an average im-
provement of more than 3 BLEU points on adversarial speech,
achieving results competitive with models trained on actual ad-
versarial speech while better preserving performance on clean
data.
Our contributions are as follows:
Figure 1:CMRT aligns speech and text semantic spaces (right).
Tosimulateadversarial speech inflections, clean speech em-
beddings (e.g., "happiness") arereplacedwith adversarial text
embeddings (e.g., "happy") during robustness fine-tuning.
• We build on bridging the modality gap works in E2E-ST to
train a model with a strongly aligned semantic space between
speech and text.
• We introduce Speech-MORPHEUS, adapting adversarial in-
flectional attacks to the speech domain.
• We demonstrate that we can significantly improve the robust-
ness in the speech modality using adversarial text only.
2. Related Works
Bridging the modality gap in E2E-STAlleviating the discrep-
ancy between speech and text modalities is crucial for closing
the performance gap between E2E-ST and cascaded models
[14, 15]. Various techniques have been proposed to align these
spaces [16, 17, 12, 4, 2]. For instance, contrastive learning has
been used to maximize similarity between speech and text rep-
resentations [17, 4]. To further improve cross-modal transfer,
STEMM [12] introduced mixup training [18] on speech and text
representations. In this work, we demonstrate that combining
contrastive learning with mixup training yields superior seman-
tic alignment, which we leverage for cross-modal robustness
transfer.
Robustness in speech translationRobustness in ST has pri-
marily been studied in cascaded systems, focusing separately
on ASR [19, 20] or NMT [21, 22]. Robustness to inflectional
variation—common in non-native speech—remains largely unex-
plored for E2E-ST. In NMT, MORPHEUS [11] addresses this by
introducing inflectional perturbations into clean text. Our work
extends this concept to the speech domain. We demonstrate that
E2E-ST models trained on standard datasets like CoV oST 2 are
highly vulnerable to such variations and propose a method to
improve robustness using only adversarial text data.
5361
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2278
3. Methodology
We begin this section by outlining the model architecture and
notation (§3.1). Then, in §3.2 we describe our method, which is
implemented in two stages: a training stage described in §3.2.1
and §3.2.2, and a fine-tuning stage described in §3.2.3. Finally,
in §3.3 we describe our method for extending MORPHEUS to
speech.
3.1. Architecture and Notation
Our model follows the standard E2E-ST framework [17], com-
prising a speech encoder, a text embedding layer, and a transla-
tion encoder-decoder. We denote the corpus as D=(s,x,y), where
s,x, and y represent raw audio, transcriptions, and target transla-
tions, respectively.
3.2. Cross-Modal Robustness Transfer (CMRT)
CMRT consists of two main steps: first, it maximizes the align-
ment between speech and text semantic spaces (§3.2.1, §3.2.2),
and second, it leverages the aligned speech and text embeddings
for adversarial fine-tuning using only adversarial text embed-
dings (§3.2.3).
3.2.1. Aligning Speech and Text Representations
Cross-modal robustness transfer requires strong alignment be-
tween speech and text semantic spaces. We hypothesize that
aligning these modalities complements speech representations
with textual syntactic features, a key component of translation
robustness [23]. We achieve this by combining Word-Aligned
Contrastive Learning (W ACO) and mixup training.
Both methods utilize word-level forced alignment. For a
wordwi, leta[ls
i :r s
i ] ande[lt
i :r t
i ] be its corresponding speech
and text embeddings. For W ACO, we compute word-level repre-
sentations via mean pooling:f s
i =MeanPool(a[l s
i :r s
i ]) and
f t
i =MeanPool(e[l t
i :r t
i ]). The contrastive loss ℓCT R(B)
maximizes the cosine similarity between positive pairs (f s
i ,f t
i )
within a batchB:
ℓCTR(B) =−E i∈B
"
log exp(sim(f s
i,f t
i )/τ)P
j∈B exp(sim(f s
i,f t
j )/τ)
#
(1)
To further bridge the modality gap, we use mixup training. For
eachwi, we sample a mixup representationmi from either the
speech or text modality based on probability p∗, where p∼
U(0,1):
mi =
(
a[ls
i :r s
i ]p<p ∗
e[lt
i :r t
i ]p≥p ∗ (2)
The final sequence m=Concat(m 1,...,m|w|) is passed to
the translation encoder-decoder. This ensures the model is accus-
tomed to receiving mixed-modality representations, facilitating
robustness transfer.
3.2.2. Training
Our training consists of two stages. First, we pretrain the text
embedding layer and translation encoder-decoder on (x,y) pairs
using standard MT cross-entropy:LM T =−E s,x,y logP(y|x) .
Second, we perform multi-task learning to maximize speech-
text semantic alignment, denoted as CMRT-TR. The model is
trained to minimize a composite loss:
L=L ST +L M T +λ ctrLCT R +L M +λ klLKL (3)
whereLST ,LM T, andLM are cross-entropy losses for speech,
text, and mixup ( m) inputs, respectively. LCT R is the con-
trastive loss over the full dataset. To bridge the modality gap,
we include a symmetric Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence loss,
(LKLm↔s +L KLm↔x )/2, which aligns the output probability
distributions of the mixup representations with both the speech
and text modalities. The hyper-parametersλCT R andλKL con-
trol the weights of the contrastive and KL losses.
3.2.3. Robustness Fine-tuning
To improve robustness without resource-intensive adversarial
speech generation, CMRT-FN leverages adversarial text exam-
ples x and clean speech s. We denote the indices of words
modified by the adversarial attack asI and the adversarial em-
beddings as˜e.
We fine-tune the CMRT-TR model by injecting adversarial
text embeddings directly into the aligned speech manifold. To
preserve the learned cross-modal alignment, the speech encoder
is frozen. We introduce adversarial mixup, where the representa-
tionm i for wordiis defined as:
fmi =



˜e[˜lt
i : ˜rt
i ]i∈ eI
a[ls
i :r s
i ]i /∈ eI,p<p ∗
e[lt
i :r t
i ]i /∈ eI,p≥p ∗
(4)
The model is trained using a cross-entropy loss on these adver-
sarial mixup embeddings,L fM =−E em,ylogP(y|em). Unlike
the initial CMRT-TR stage where symmetric KL divergence is
employed for alignment, we utilize asymmetric KL divergence
to align the output distributions of the adversarial mixup embed-
dings with those of the clean speech and text:
LKL fm→s=D KL (P(y|s)||P(y|em))(5)
LKL fm→x=D KL (P(y|x)||(P(y|em))(6)
The final fine-tuning loss is:
L=L ST +L M T +L fM +λ kl(LKL fm→s+L KL fm→x)/2.(7)
3.3. Speech-MORPHEUS
MORPHEUS [11] simulates inflectional errors common in non-
native speech by replacing nouns, verbs, and adjectives with
candidate inflections of the same Part-Of-Speech (POS) tag. We
extend this to the speech domain as Speech-MORPHEUS. Since
direct manipulation of continuous audio is infeasible, we target
the translation encoder-decoder by inflecting transcriptions and
synthesizing the resulting adversarial text into speech via Text-
To-Speech (TTS).
To ensure the attack is effective in the acoustic domain, we
introduce an additional filtering step: we exclude any candidate
inflections that are phonetically identical to the original word
(homophones). This prevents "attacks" that are distinct in writing
but acoustically indistinguishable to the ST model, which is
particularly relevant for languages like French.
4. Experiments
4.1. Dataset
We conduct our experiments on CoV oST 2 dataset [6], a large
multilingual ST dataset that is based on Common V oice project
[24]. CoV oST 2 covers translation from 21 source languages
to English and from English to 15 target languages. However,
5362
we only experiment with 4 language directions, namely En-De,
En-Ca, En-Ar, Fr-En. We report the results on the test set.
For adversarial data experiments, we use Speech-
MORPHEUS (described in §3.3) to generate an adversarial copy
of 50k examples sampled from the train set, and a copy of the
dev and test sets. We report the results on the test set.
4.2. Experimental Setup
This section provides a comprehensive description of our exper-
imental setup for training E2E-ST models and for introducing
CMRT into the E2E-ST training pipeline.1
PreprocessingAudio inputs consist of raw 16-bit, 16kHz mono-
channel speech. We exclude samples where the number of
speech frames exceeds 480k or is fewer than 1k. For text, punc-
tuation is removed from transcriptions, and we employ a shared
10k-vocabulary unigram SentencePiece model for both source
and target languages. To obtain the word-level alignments re-
quired by our method, we use the NeMo Forced Aligner (NFA)
[25].
Speech-MorpheusAs MORPHEUS was originally designed
for English [11], we extend the framework to French by using
inflecteur 2 for finding inflections and spaCy-lefff 3 for French-
specific tokenization and Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging. Further-
more, Speech-Morpheus requires two extra tools for phonemiza-
tion and TTS. For phonemization, we use eSpeak NG 4, while
for TTS, we use XTTS-v2 [26] as a state-of-the-art multilingual
TTS model.
TrainingOur models are trained in two stages. First, the transla-
tion encoder-decoder is pretrained on transcription-translation
pairs from the CoV oST 2 training set. This stage uses a learning
rate of 1e-4 and a maximum of 33k tokens per batch for up to
100k steps, with early stopping triggered if the validation loss
does not decrease for 10 epochs. In the second stage, we per-
form E2E-ST fine-tuning of the speech encoder and translation
encoder-decoder for 40k steps. We use a learning rate of 1e-4
and a maximum batch size of 16M audio frames. For CMRT-TR,
hyperparameters are set to λctr = 1.0 , contrastive tempera-
ture τ= 0.2 , KL weight λkl = 2.0 , and mixup probability
p∗ = 0.8.
Fine-tuningWe fine-tune the pretrained models for 5k steps
using a learning rate of 1e-4 and a maximum batch size of 16M
audio frames. During this stage, the speech encoder is frozen to
maintain the learned cross-modal alignment. For CMRT-FN, the
KL weightλkl is increased to 5.0 to prioritize robustness, while
the mixup probabilityp∗ remains 0.8.
All experiments are implemented using Fairseq [ 27]. MT
models are trained on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU, and ST
models are trained on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU.
InferenceFor models in the training stage, we evaluate the
average of the last 10 epoch checkpoints. In the fine-tuning
stage, we average checkpoints only if the number of epochs
exceeds 10; otherwise, the final checkpoint is used. Translations
are generated using beam search with a beam size of 5. We
report detokenized, case-sensitive BLEU scores [28] computed
via SacreBLEU [29].
ModelOur architecture consists of two primary components:
a speech encoder and a translation encoder-decoder. For En-
X directions, the encoder utilizes a pretrained HuBERT model
[30], while mHuBERT [ 31] is used for Fr-En. The encoder
1Our code:https://github.com/issam9/CMRT
2https://github.com/Achuttarsing/inflecteur
3https://github.com/sammous/spacy-lefff
4https://github.com/espeak-ng/espeak-ng
is augmented with two 1D-convolutional layers (kernel size 5,
stride 2, padding 2, and 1024 hidden units) to reduce the temporal
resolution of the output representations. The second component
is a Transformer-based translation encoder-decoder, pretrained
on the CoV oST 2 training set. It features 6 encoder and 6 decoder
layers, each configured with 512 hidden units, 8 attention heads,
and a 2048-unit feed-forward network (FFN).
Baselines
We compare our approach against the following baselines:
• MT-Transformer:A text-only translation encoder-decoder
trained using the machine translation objective.
• HuBERT-Transformer:An E2E-ST model with an architec-
ture identical to our speech-only baseline, trained with the
standard ST objective.
• HuBERT-CMOT:A state-of-the-art baseline using Cross-
modal Mixup via Optimal Transport (CMOT) [32].
• TTS-Morpheus-FN:The HuBERT-Transformer baseline fine-
tuned with an ST objective on a synthetic dataset of 50k
Speech-MORPHEUS examples.
• CMRT-TR (Ours):Our model trained using WACO and
mixup alignment as described in §3.2.2.
• CMRT-FN (Ours):The CMRT-TR model fine-tuned using
adversarial mixup training as detailed in §3.2.3.
5. Results and Analysis
5.1. Adversarial Robustness
Table 1 demonstrates that CMRT-FN effectively transfers robust-
ness from the text to the speech modality. Without using any
adversarial speech data, CMRT-FN improves robustness by an
average of 3.4 BLEU points across four directions compared
to the HuBERT-Transformer baseline. The improvements over
both HuBERT-Transformer and CMRT-TR on the Morpheus test
set are statistically significant (p<0.01 via paired approximate
randomization [33]). While TTS-Morpheus-FN (fine-tuned on
50k adversarial speech samples) achieves the highest robustness,
it suffers a significant performance degradation on theOrigi-
naltest set (3.6 BLEU drop). In contrast, CMRT-FN maintains
better performance on original CoV oST 2 data, with a smaller
drop of only 0.6 BLEU compared to its base model CMRT-TR.
Surprisingly, our method leads to slightly better robustness on
Fr-En; although this is partly due to CMRT-TR’s performance
on theOriginaltest set, it suggests our method can close the gap
with adversarial fine-tuning on certain source languages.
To demonstrate that the drop in performance is due to
Speech-MORPHEUS attack and not due to the quality of TTS
data, Table 1 also shows the results of applying the same TTS
model on clean transcriptions, where the performance is even
higher than theOriginaltest set because the TTS speech is
normalized. The table also shows the performance of the MT-
Transformer on clean and adversarial MORPHEUS transcrip-
tions, which we find to be correlated with the effect of Speech-
MORPHEUS on HuBERT-Transformer.
Furthermore, We observe that state-of-the-art alignment
methods like CMOT are still highly vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, witnessing an average drop of 7.4 BLEU points when
moving from original to adversarial inputs. This underscores the
necessity of targeted robustness fine-tuning.
5.2. Computational Efficiency
CMRT-FN is computationally efficient. The second-stage fine-
tuning requires only 1/8th the time of the initial training stage.
5363
Table 1:Comparative results of CMRT-FN and baselines across four languages in the CoVoST 2 dataset. Original indicates the standard
test set; Morpheus denotes the Speech-MORPHEUS adversarial version; and Clean refers to TTS-synthesized clean transcriptions. Best
results on Morpheus achieved without adversarial speech are underlined. CMRT-FN improves adversarial robustness by an average of
3.4 BLEU points over the HuBERT-Transformer without requiring any adversarial speech during training.
En-De En-Ca En-Ar Fr-En
Original Morpheus Clean Original Morpheus Clean Original Morpheus Clean Original Morpheus Clean
MT-Transformer - 13.2 26.7 - 20.2 34.6 - 11.3 18.3 - 21.3 32.3
HuBERT-Transformer 21.4 14.4 25.3 27.4 19.7 32.7 15.7 12.8 19.2 28.4 20.5 27.9
HuBERT-CMOT21.814.625.9 28.218.433.5 16.214.519.5 30.922.030.9
CMRT-TR 20.8 14.4 25.1 26.5 19.8 31.6 14.8 12.7 18.3 29.5 21.9 29.9
TTS-Morpheus-FN (50K) 18.219.922.5 22.926.128.7 13.015.417.0 24.7 25.1 25.5
CMRT-FN (50K) 19.9 17.4 24.0 25.4 23.6 31.0 13.9 14.5 17.3 28.3 24.6 28.6
CMRT-FN 20.3 17.6 24.5 25.8 23.6 31.7 14.4 14.7 17.9 28.825.2 29.2
On an NVIDIA H100, the CMRT-TR stage took 15:56:03, while
CMRT-FN was completed in 01:46:19. Notably, this is signifi-
cantly faster than generating the required 50k adversarial speech
samples via TTS, which took 17:53:01 on an RTX 2080 Ti.
5.3. Generation to Massively Pretrained Translation Models
Table 2 presents the results obtained by leveraging No Language
Left Behind (NLLB) [34]—a massively pretrained multilingual
model—for the initialization of the MT transformer. Specifi-
cally, our implementation utilizes the efficient distilled version 5.
The experimental results demonstrate that while the integration
of a massively pretrained model significantly enhances overall
translation quality, a substantial performance degradation per-
sists when evaluating on the Morpheus adversarial set. This
indicates that vulnerability to adversarial perturbations is an in-
herent issue when training on clean datasets, highlighting that
fine-tuning on adversarial data remains essential for achieving
robust performance.
Crucially, the use of a high-capacity pretrained model does
not diminish the robustness benefits provided by CMRT; rather,
it amplifies them. Fine-tuning with CMRT leads to improve-
ments of 3.6 and 6.1 over HuBERT-NLLB on En-De and Fr-En
respectively. These improvements surpass those achieved using
the standard transformer backbone (3.2 and 4.7 BLEU points
on the same language directions respectively), highlighting the
scalability of our approach.
Table 2:Results of utilizing the NLLB pretrained model for MT
transformer initialization. For brevity, results are shown for
En-De and Fr-En on Original and Morpheus data. The findings
indicate that leveraging a state-of-the-art MT model does not
saturate the robustness improvements provided by CMRT.
En-De Fr-En
Original Morpheus Original Morpheus
HuBERT-NLLB28.122.9 31.9 24.7
CMRT-TR 27.6 23.433.727.2
TTS-Morpheus-FN (50K) 24.929.130.431.5
CMRT-FN 26.6 26.5 33.6 30.8
5.4. Effect of Shared Semantic Space
Figure 2 demonstrates that the cosine similarity between speech
and text representations strongly correlates with adversarial ro-
bustness following CMRT fine-tuning. While mixup training
alone exhibits significantly lower semantic similarity compared
5https://huggingface.co/facebook/nllb-200-distilled-600M
Figure 2:Correlation between speech-text representation cosine
similarity (En-De dev set) and BLEU scores on the adversarial
test set. Higher semantic alignment corresponds to improved
CMRT-FN effectiveness, with the combination of WACO and
mixup training yielding the best performance.
to W ACO, the resulting gap in BLEU scores is relatively narrow.
This suggests that mixup training provides a distinct structural
advantage: it familiarizes the translation encoder-decoder with
multi-modal (speech-text) inputs, a prerequisite for effective
CMRT fine-tuning. Crucially, the results confirm that combin-
ing WACO and mixup training achieves the superior semantic
alignment and the highest robustness to adversarial perturbations.
This validates our hypothesis that robust cross-modal transfer
is predicated on both strong semantic alignment and encoder-
decoder familiarity with mixed-modality representations.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced Speech-MORPHEUS, a framework
for generating adversarial speech targeting inflectional variation,
and proposed Cross-Modal Robustness Transfer (CMRT) to en-
hance E2E-ST robustness using only adversarial text data. Our
results demonstrate that CMRT improves adversarial robustness
by over 3 BLEU points on average across four translation direc-
tions without requiring any adversarial speech during training.
Furthermore, we showed that the benefits of CMRT scale to mas-
sively pretrained models; utilizing an NLLB backbone, CMRT
improved robustness by up to 6.1 BLEU points while maintain-
ing standard performance. These findings confirm that semantic
alignment between speech and text can be effectively leveraged
to transfer robustness across modalities. In future work, we
plan to evaluate the generalizability of Speech-MORPHEUS and
CMRT across a broader range of speech-to-text tasks and diverse
neural architectures.
5364
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
The authors used Gemini for assistance with code development
and for editing and polishing the manuscript for clarity and
conciseness. All authors have reviewed and approved the final
manuscript and remain fully responsible for its content.
8. Acknowledgments
The research presented in this paper was conducted as part of
VOXReality project6, which was funded by the European Union
Horizon Europe program under grant agreement No 101070521.
This work used the Dutch national e-infrastructure with the
support of the SURF Cooperative using grant no. EINF-11297.
9. References
[1] Q. Dong, M. Wang, H. Zhou, S. Xu, B. Xu, and L. Li,
“Consecutive decoding for speech-to-text translation,”Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35,
no. 14, pp. 12 738–12 748, May 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/17508
[2] C. Zhang, Y . Zhou, R. Zhao, Y . Chen, and X. Shi, “Representation
purification for end-to-end speech translation,” inProceedings of
the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics,
O. Rambow, L. Wanner, M. Apidianaki, H. Al-Khalifa, B. D.
Eugenio, and S. Schockaert, Eds. Abu Dhabi, UAE: Association
for Computational Linguistics, Jan. 2025, pp. 6255–6269. [Online].
Available: https://aclanthology.org/2025.coling-main.418/
[3] A. Anastasopoulos, O. Bojar, J. Bremerman, R. Cattoni,
M. Elbayad, M. Federico, X. Ma, S. Nakamura, M. Negri,
J. Niehues, J. Pino, E. Salesky, S. Stüker, K. Sudoh, M. Turchi,
A. Wa