The (non-)universality of prominence and Intonation Phrases: German and
Hungarian listeners’ perception of an unfamiliar language
Farhat Jabeen ID 1, ´Akos Buza1, Ella Reimann1
1Bielefeld University, Germany
{firstname.lastname}@uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract
This study adopts a typological perspective to examine the non-
universality of acoustic cues used to perceive prosodic promi-
nence and Intonation Phrase (IP) boundaries. By using speech
extracts from an unfamiliar language, we analyse the role of
acoustic cues beyond the lexical and pragmatic factors. Em-
ploying Rapid Prosody Transcription, we presented speech ex-
tracts from Urdu to German and Hungarian listeners who were
asked to identify prominent words and IP boundaries. We found
that listener groups relied on different F0 contours and scaling
patterns to perceive prominence. Moreover, they exhibited vari-
able inter- and intra-rater agreement when identifying IP bound-
aries. By presenting the same Urdu stimuli to listeners of ty-
pologically diverse languages, we offer a nuanced perspective
to investigate within- and between-group (dis)agreement. This
sheds light on language-specific and cross-linguistic variability
in the perception of prosodic phenomena.
Index Terms: prominence, IP boundary, RPT, GAMMs, Urdu,
German, Hungarian
1. Introduction
This paper offers a first investigation of the role of typological
differences in German and Hungarian listeners’ perception of
prominence and Intonation Phrase (IP) boundaries in Urdu, a
South Asian language unfamiliar to them. Our results indicate
that the perception of prosodic prominence and IP boundaries
is mediated by listeners’ L1 and by variation across different
stimulus speakers. By drawing on data from two under-studied
languages (Urdu and Hungarian) and comparing them with Ger-
man, we offer a typological perspective that calls into question
the presumed universality of cues marking IP boundaries.
1.1. Background
When listeners are presented with an unfamiliar language, se-
mantic and syntactic information is not available to them. The
use of acoustic cues is partly language-specific and requires
prior knowledge of the target language. Nevertheless, exist-
ing research shows that listeners are able to recognise promi-
nent syllables in an unknown language [1]. Similar results have
been reported for the identification of IP boundaries in unfa-
miliar languages ([2] for German listeners of Estonian, [3] for
English listeners of Swedish, and [4] for German listeners of
Papuan Malay). Drawing on evidence from a variety of lan-
guages, these findings are claimed to support the universality
of acoustic cues used to identify IP boundaries. However, we
argue that this conclusion rests on an analytical fallacy. For in-
stance, the high inter-rater agreement reported in [4] may reflect
listeners’ reliance on the same cues to identify IP boundaries in
both their L1 and unfamiliar languages. [4] recognised this and
sought to address it in their subsequent work [5] by comparing
Papuan Malay listeners’ perception of IP boundaries with that
of German listeners. Nevertheless, we contend that such com-
parisons (L1 vs. unknown language) do not offer unequivocal
evidence for the universality of acoustic cues marking IPs.
We claim that a reliable set up to evaluate the cross-
linguistic use of cues is to present the same speech stimuli to
listeners from typologically diverse languages (between-group
comparison). Furthermore, it is important to compare the iden-
tification of IP boundaries with that of prosodic prominence.
Given that most previous research has focused on IP bound-
aries, it implies that the use of acoustic cues to identify prosodic
prominence is not universal. If so, any analysis of the univer-
sality of IP making cues would benefit from a comparison with
the perception of prosodic prominence. This paper addresses
these gaps by examining the identification of prominence and IP
boundaries in an unknown language. We report German (West
Germanic) and Hungarian (Finno-Ugric) listeners’ identifica-
tion of prominence and IP boundaries in Urdu (Indo-Aryan),
a language unfamiliar to them.
1.2. Identification of IP boundaries
The bulk of research on the perception of IP boundaries in un-
known languages may be grouped into two categories: Stud-
ies comparing the identification of IP boundaries in a) native
vs. unknown languages [3, 5] and b) studies examining only
the unknown languages [1, 4]. [2], falling into the first group,
reported minimal inter-rater agreement in the perception of IP
boundaries by Estonian native listeners (k=0.38) and by Ger-
man listeners of Estonian as an unknown language (k=0.28).
No direct comparison between German and Estonian listeners
was reported to assess (dis)agreement in their perception.
[4], from the second group, report substantial agreement
(k=0.71) between four German listeners’ identification of IP
boundaries in their L1 and three unfamiliar and typologically
diverse Eastern Indonesian languages. This led the authors to
claim that the acoustic cues to IP boundaries are universal and
independent of prior exposure to unfamiliar languages. How-
ever, we argue that German listeners used the same set of acous-
tic cues to identify IP boundaries in their L1 as well as in un-
familiar languages. Importantly, the inter-rater agreement is
highly skewed by the cases where annotators did not perceive a
boundary (63%). This raises questions against the universality
of IP marking cues, since the claim primarily relies on nega-
tive evidence, namely, agreement that there is no IP boundary.
The positive evidence is derived from the remaining data, which
shows varying agreement rate. These findings, combined with
the minimal agreement between Estonian listeners (L1 and un-
3711
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-707
familiar), significantly weaken claims regarding the universality
of acoustic cues marking IP boundaries.
1.3. Motivation
Despite being typologically distinct, German, Hungarian, and
Urdu share a set of similar acoustic cues (final lengthening and
pause in German, Hungarian, and Urdu; downdrift in Urdu and
Hungarian) for marking IP boundaries [6, 7, 8, 9]. However,
these languages differ in their use of F0 to delineate prosodic
prominence. While both Urdu and Hungarian use predictable
F0 movement to mark Accentual Phrases [8, 10, 11, 12, 13],
Urdu uses consecutive rising F0 contours (LH), while Hunga-
rian utilizes consecutive falling contours (HL). German, in con-
trast, employs variable F0 shape and scaling to indicate post-
lexical prominence [7]. This highlights the differential use of
prominence and IP marking cues between German and Urdu on
one hand and between Urdu and Hungarian on the other. The
current study investigates whether these similarities/differences
between typologically different languages are reflected in Ger-
man and Hungarian listeners’ identification of prominence and
IP boundaries in Urdu, a language unknown to them. We em-
ploy Rapid Prosody Transcription (RPT) [14, 15, 16] which
involves annotating prosodic prominence and IPs by listeners.
Crucially, we make no assumptions about Urdu listeners’ per-
ception of prominence and IP boundaries in this paper.
1.4. Research questions & hypotheses
Based on the research gaps highlighted above, we address the
following questions and hypotheses.
1. Do the similarities and differences in their use of acoustic
cues affect German and Hungarian listeners’ identification of
IP boundariesin Urdu?
H1: If the cues for identifing IP boundaries are universal, we
predict no inter-rater differences between these listeners.
2. Given their distinctive use of F0, do German and Hungarian
listeners differ in their identification ofprominencein Urdu?
H2a: We predict differential use of F0 by German and Hun-
garian listeners to perceive prosodic prominence.
H2b: If the cues to identify IP boundaries are universal,
while the cues to perceive prosodic prominence are language-
dependent, we predict lower agreement for prominence per-
ception compared with the identification of IPs.
3. Are the differences in inter-rater agreement and the use of F0
mediated by stimulispeaker?
H3a: If the identification of IP boundaries is based on univer-
sal cues, we expect no effect of speaker on this process.
H3b: Speaker-based variability may be significant if prosodic
prominence does not rely on universal acoustic cues.
In what follows, we offer a two-fold analysis compris-
ing inter-rater agreement (within- and between-group compar-
isons) and the analysis of time normalised F0 contour of words
perceived as prominent by German and Hungarian listeners
(between-group comparison).
2. Methodology
2.1. Materials
For the stimuli, we used four Urdu extracts, each read by a dif-
ferent speaker (2 male, 2 female). Each recording consisted of
ca. 18 seconds and 5-8 syntactic clauses (see Table 1). The au-
dios were transliterated in Latin alphabet by a native speaker.
The text was stripped of all punctuation marks to prevent lis-
teners from using them to identify IPs. Each text was presented
separately to the participants as a printed work sheet. Written
instructions about the task were provided in listeners’ L1 (Ger-
man or Hungarian).
2.2. Participants and procedure
Twenty-six German listeners (16 female, 10 male), aged 19 to
60 years (mean=27.7, SD=8.75), and twenty-one Hungarian lis-
teners (13 female, 8 male), aged 22 to 60 years (mean=32.4,
SD=11.1) participated in the study.
For each text read by a different speaker, participants were
first directed to listen to the audio. After the familiarization
round, they were asked to use a slash “/” to denote an IP
boundary (the end of anAbschnittfor German, aszakaszfor
Hungarian, both translated as ‘section’). Their second task
was to underline the prominent words (betontfor German,
hangs´ulyosnakfor Hungarian, both translated as ‘accented’).
Participants could listen to the recordings as many times as they
wanted. They listened to each audio maximally five times. The
mean duration of the experiment was fifteen minutes.
2.3. Data analysis
We calculated Fleiss’ Kappa [17] in R [18] to annotate inter-
annotator agreement for the within- and between-group com-
parisons of German and Hungarian listeners. To analyse the in-
teraction between listeners’ L1 and four Urdu speakers, we ran
Generalized Linear Regression. Due to the between-participant
design for L1, no random effects could be added to this model.
For each listener group, we analysed the role of speakers by
running separate Generalized Linear Mixed Effects Regression
(GLMER) models for the perception of prominence and IP
boundaries. Speakers were added as fixed factors and (German
or Hungarian) listeners were added as random effects.
2.4. Acoustic analysis
To analyse the F0 contour of words perceived as prominent (sec-
tion 3.2), the word boundaries in the stimuli were annotated
manually using PRAAT [19]. We extracted the time-normalised
F0 of prominent words and analysed it using Generalised Addi-
tive Mixed Models (GAMMs) [20] in R. The F0 values were
normalised (reference: each speaker’s mean F0) to account
for speaker-based differences. The GAMMs included stimuli
speakers and listeners’ L1 as fixed factors and random smooths
for listeners. We added non-linear tensor smooths to check for
an interaction between prosodic prominence, speakers, and lis-
teners’ L1. Rho values were added to the model to account
for autocorrelation between the time series. As variables were
added in forward selection, model criticism was carried out by
comparing the progressively complex models with the simple
models usingcompareML(). The model with lower AIC was
used for further analysis.
3. Results
3.1. Inter-rater agreement
3.1.1. IP boundaries
Table 1 presents aggregated (between-groups) and language-
specific (within-group) Fleiss’ Kappa values for the identifi-
cation of IP boundaries by German and Hungarian listeners.
Based on the scale in [21], the aggregated Kappa shows weak to
3712
moderate agreement between these listener groups. Crucially,
the number of IP boundaries perceived by either German or
Hungarian listeners does not coincide with the number of syn-
tactic clauses or pauses in the stimuli. Table 1 further illustrates
that Kappa values vary for each speaker. GLMER analysis of
inter-rater agreement revealed a significant interaction between
listeners’ L1 and speakers (χ2(3) = 90.9, p<0.0001). Post-hoc
analysis further showed a significant main effect of speakers for
the identification of IP boundaries for both German (χ 2(3) =
72.0, p<0.0001) and Hungarian listeners (χ 2(3) = 12.9, p =
0.004). These results lead us to reject hypothesis H3a.
Table 1:Fleiss’ Kappa values for identifying IP boundaries.
Total number of IP boundaries perceived at least once is given
in parentheses.
Stimuli speaker
Female1 Female2 Male1 Male2
Clauses 6 6 8 5
Pauses 10 5 5 6
German 0.50 (15) 0.70 (12) 0.70 (7) 0.59 (14)
Hungarian 0.46 (11) 0.57 (11) 0.72 (9) 0.62 (10)
Aggregate 0.52 0.56 0.63 0.47
k Weak Weak Moderate Weak
3.1.2. Prosodic prominence
Table 2 presents Fleiss’ Kappa values for the perception of
prominent words. The aggregated Kappa values show mini-
mal to no agreement between German and Hungarian listen-
ers. Overall, Germans perceived a higher percentage of words
as prominent than Hungarian listeners. Moreover, German lis-
teners showed minimal to weak agreement, whereas Hungarian
listeners exhibited minimal agreement. We found support for
Hypothesis H3b, as the analysis revealed a significant effect of
speakers for German listeners (χ 2(3) = 23.1, p<0.0001). We
found no effect of speakers for Hungarian listeners (p=0.1).
Table 2:Fleiss’ Kappa for prominent words. The percentage of
words perceived as prominent is given in parentheses.
Stimuli speaker
Female1 Female2 Male1 Male2
Words 44 43 38 36
German 0.31 (86) 0.44 (84) 0.35 (89) 0.38 (97)
Hungarian 0.23 (64) 0.31 (49) 0.23 (55) 0.25 (61)
Aggregate 0.26 0.25 0.16 0.28
k Minimal Minimal None Minimal
3.2. F0 contour of prominent words
Figure 1 depicts the mean F0 contour of Urdu words perceived
as prominent by German and Hungarian listeners. It illustrates
that listeners’ perception is influenced both by their L1 and by
stimuli speakers. The GAMM analysis showed a significant
three-way interaction between prominence perception, listen-
ers’ L1, and speakers (F = 55.2, p = 0.001). Therefore, we ran
separate GAMMs for each speaker.
male1 male2
female1 female2
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
0.95
1.00
1.05
0.95
1.00
1.05
Time intervals
F0 (mean norm.)
language German Hungarian
Figure 1:Time normalized (loess smooth) F0 contour of words
perceived as prominent by German and Hungarian listeners.
3.2.1. Stimuli speaker: Female1
The top left panel of Figure 1 shows the F0 contour of promi-
nent words produced by Female1. The difference curve in Fig-
ure 2 indicates that, apart from the F0 onset (between intervals
1 and 2), there was no difference in the F0 contour of words
perceived as prominent by both listener groups.
1 2 3 4 5
-0.10 -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0.00
Diffference curve: Female1
Normalized time
Estimated difference in F0
difference, excl. random
Figure 2:Difference curve for words produced by Female1 and
perceived as prominent by German and Hungarian listeners.
Regions of significant differences are enclosed within red lines.
3.2.2. Stimuli speaker: Female2
The mean F0 contour of the words produced by Female2 that
were perceived as prominent is shown in the top right panel of
Figure 1. This reflects the difference between German and Hun-
garian intonation: Hungarian listeners perceived the falling con-
tour as prominent, whereas German listeners associated promi-
nence with a rising F0 contour. Figure 3 illustrates that only the
difference in the onset of these contour is significant (intervals
1-2). The low F0 of the falling contour is scaled at the same
height as the F0 peak of the rising contour. We interpret this as
evidence of German and Hungarian listeners’ differential use of
F0 scaling in the perception of prosodic prominence.
3713
1 2 3 4 5
-0.025 -0.020 -0.015 -0.010 -0.005 0.000 0.005
Diffference curve: Female2
Normalized time
Estimated difference in F0
difference, excl. random
Figure 3:Difference curve for words produced by Female2 and
perceived as prominent by German and Hungarian listeners.
Regions of significant differences are enclosed within red lines.
3.2.3. Stimuli speaker: Male1
The bottom left panel in Figure 1 shows a similar pattern for
Male1 to that observed for Female2. Hungarian listeners as-
sociated the falling F0 contour with prominence, whereas Ger-
man listeners perceived the rising contour as prominence ren-
dering. Figure 3 illustrates that this change in F0 over time is
significant, with a small exception in the third quarter of the F0
contour. These results further support the claim that German
and Hungarian listeners employ distinct F0 scaling strategies
for high and low F0 targets in the perception of prominence.
1 2 3 4 5
0.000 0.005 0.010
Diffference curve: Male1
Normalized time
Estimated difference in F0
difference, excl. random
Figure 4:Difference curve for words produced by Male1 and
perceived as prominent by German and Hungarian listeners.
Regions of significant differences are enclosed within red lines.
3.2.4. Stimuli speaker: Male2
Finally, the bottom right panel in Figure 1 presents the mean F0
contours of prominent words produced by Male2. The use of
scaling-based differences in German and Hungarian listeners’
prominence perception is best captured in this speaker’s data.
Both the rise and the fall, perceived as prominent by German
and Hungarian listeners respectively, are shallow. The differ-
ence curve presented in Figure 5 shows that this difference in
F0 scaling is significant (cf. intervals 3-4). Further research
is needed to determine whether the difference in German and
Hungarian listeners’ perception is better captured by F0 scal-
ing, rather than F0 shape-based differences.
1 2 3 4 5
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
Diffference curve: Male2
Normalized time
Estimated difference in F0
difference, excl. random
Figure 5:Difference curve for words produced by Male2 and
perceived as prominent by German and Hungarian listeners.
Regions of significant differences are enclosed within red lines.
4. Discussion and conclusions
Our findings show that untrained German and Hungarian listen-
ers differed in their identification of prosodic prominence and IP
boundaries in Urdu, a language unfamiliar to them. Overall, we
found evidence supporting our hypotheses: H2a, German and
Hungarian listeners’ differential use of F0 to perceive promi-
nence; H2b, lower Kappa values for prominence perception
compared with the identification of IP boundaries; and H3b,
prominence perception was affected by stimuli speaker. These
results do not support the claims regarding the universality of
acoustic cues marking IP boundaries. Their identification is
language-dependent and influenced by speakers, leading us to
reject H1 and H3a. Accordingly, we argue that the findings of
[4, 22, 23] should be reinterpreted as listeners’ use of same cues
to identify IP boundaries in their L1 and unfamiliar languages.
It is the influence of L1—reflected in the use of a shared set
of acoustic cues—rather than the universality of these cues that
drives the high inter-rater agreement reported in these studies.
Our results further highlight previously unattested nuances
in this research area. The overall higher inter-rater agreement
for the identification of IPs suggests that IP boundaries rely on
a smaller set of shared acoustic cues, resulting in less variability
compared with the perception of prosodic prominence. Intrigu-
ingly, nearly every word in each of the four audios was marked
as prominent by at least one German listener. This pattern may
reflect German speakers’ predominant reliance on F0 movement
to signal prosodic prominence. Since Urdu intonation features
rises (LH) on consecutive content words, German participants
may have interpreted these as accentuation. In contrast, Hungar-
ian listeners are accustomed to using only particular F0 contours
(HL) to signal prominence, which prevents them from interpret-
ing every F0 movement as prominent.
The issue of cross-linguistic comparability of the prosodic
hierarchy remains unaddressed in this study. German listeners’
perception of prominent words and IP boundaries involves the
identification of pitch accents and a prosodic boundary respec-
tively. On the other hand, Hungarian listeners perceive promi-
nence and IP boundaries by identifying different levels of phras-
ing in the prosodic hierarchy i.e., AP and IP. These differences
in the relevant prosodic level may account for their differential
use of acoustic cues. Further research comparing Hungarian
listeners with those of other phrase prominence languages (e.g.,
French, Korean) might help disentangle this issue.
3714
5. Acknowledgments
This research has been partially funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)
- CRC-1646, project number 512393437, project A03. Many
thanks go to Bob Ladd for insightful discussions and valuable
feedback on the manuscript. The errors, of course, are all ours.
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
No AI generative tools were used for writing or editing this
paper.
Author contribution
Farhat Jabeen: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal anal-
ysis, Investigation, Visualization, Writing original draft, review
and editing
´Akos Buza: Hungarian data collection, review and editing
Ella Reimann: German data collection, Data curation, Investi-
gation, Writing original draft, review and editing