DiffRhythm 2: Efficient and High Fidelity Song Generation via Block Flow
Matching
Yuepeng Jiang1,∗, Huakang Chen1,∗, Ziqian Ning1, Jixun Yao1, Zerui Han2, Di Wu2, Meng Meng2,
Jian Luan2, Zhonghua Fu1, Lei Xie1,∗∗
1 ASLP Lab
2 MiLM Plus, Xiaomi Inc., China
jiangyp@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, huakang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, lxie@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract
Generating full-length, high-quality songs requires
lyric–music consistency and coherent musical structure. Exist-
ing non-autoregressive (NAR) methods are efficient but often
struggle with temporal alignment between lyrics and singing
vocals. Meanwhile, reinforcement learning from human
feedback across multiple preferences often relies on merging
separately optimized models, causing performance degrada-
tion. We introduce DiffRhythm 2, an end-to-end framework
for controllable song generation. It uses semi-autoregressive
block flow matching to achieve faithful lyric–vocal alignment
without duration labels or explicit constraints, while preserving
NAR quality and efficiency. A 5 Hz music variational au-
toencoder enables long-sequence modeling with high-fidelity
reconstruction. For multi-preference optimization, we propose
cross-pair preference optimization, which jointly learns prefer-
ence pairs across reward dimensions in one model and avoids
merging-induced degradation. We further introduce stochastic
block representation alignment loss to improve musicality and
structural coherence. DiffRhythm 2 generates songs up to 210
seconds, outperforms open-source models in subjective and ob-
jective evaluations, and remains efficient. Code and weights are
availble at: https://github.com/xiaomi-research/diffrhythm2.
Index Terms: speech recognition, human-computer interac-
tion, computational paralinguistics
1. Introduction
Music serves as an abstract expression of human emotion and
culture. Songs represent a unique art form, combining music
and language to convey emotions and stories through melody
and lyrics. With the rapid development of deep learning, mu-
sic generation has progressed beyond symbolic music gener-
ation [1, 2] and singing voice synthesis [3, 4, 5], moving to-
wards more challenging tasks such as instrumental music gener-
ation [6, 7, 8] and song generation. Unlike singing voice synthe-
sis, which produces vocals with predefined melodies, or instru-
mental music generation, which only models melody and instru-
mentation, song generation requires joint modeling of lyrics,
structure, singing vocal and accompaniment. This is further
complicated by the typical length of songs, which often exceeds
three minutes, making lyric alignment and stable style modeling
particularly challenging.
Early approaches, such as Jukebox [9] and SongCre-
ator [10], generate songs by predicting the acoustic tokens of
vocals and accompaniment mixed into a single track. However,
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
the limited information density of these tokens hampers high-
quality song generation. Yue [11] improves generation quality
by modeling the vocals and accompaniment on separate tracks,
while SongGen [12] further enhances quality by introducing in-
terleaved dual-track prediction. Despite these improvements,
Yue and SongGen predict the tracks independently, which of-
ten leads to inconsistencies between the vocals and accompani-
ment. LeV o [13] addresses this issue by first generating a mixed
track and using it to guide the separate prediction of vocals and
accompaniment, thereby reducing mismatches. However, the
overall quality is still limited by the information compression in
the mixed track tokenization, and it is difficult to generate com-
plex and rich accompaniment. Most of these methods are based
on autoregressive frameworks, which result in slow generation
speeds. This hinders real-time applications and user interactiv-
ity.
Unlike the aforementioned approaches, DiffRhythm [14]
takes a bold approach within a non-autoregressive (NAR)
framework. By leveraging the generation ability of diffusion
models and continuous representations, it achieves high-quality
mixed-track generation of vocals and accompaniment at over 50
times faster than autoregressive methods. However, NAR mod-
els struggle with lyric alignment in long sequences. DiffRhythm
addresses this issue by conditioning on sentence-level times-
tamps. However, this solution significantly reduces creativ-
ity and diversity, and also imposes higher requirements on the
training data. ACE-Step [15] solved the alignment problem
without timestamps by introducing representation alignment
(REPA) [16] loss with mHuBERT [17] as semantic constraints.
However, the addition of these constraints significantly reduced
musicality, creating a delicate trade-off between lyric alignment
and generation quality.
In addition, pretrained models often fail to align with hu-
man preferences due to the gap between training objectives and
desired song quality. Therefore, a typical method is to intro-
duce reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) in
the post-training process to refine generation preferences across
various musical dimensions. DiffRhythm+ [18] demonstrated
the feasibility of improving overall musicality with Direct Pref-
erence Optimization (DPO) [19]. LeV o extended this approach
by applying DPO to different dimensions separately and inter-
polating model weights to enhance overall performance. While
this strategy improved balance across dimensions, it inevitably
limited the upper bound of each individual capability due to the
averaging effect.
To address these challenges, we present DiffRhythm 2, a
semi-autoregressive end-to-end framework for song generation
based on block flow matching. This framework partitions la-
tent representations into fixed-length blocks and generates each
4034
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-128
block non-autoregressively using flow matching, while main-
taining autoregressive dependencies between blocks. This de-
sign enables faithful lyric alignment without requiring addi-
tional labels or constraints. The semi-autoregressive structure
provides rich bidirectional context within blocks, ensuring long-
sequence consistency, and supports fast inference for songs up
to 210 seconds long. To accommodate block flow matching
during training, we introduce stochastic block REPA loss that
ensures efficient training and provides accurate representation
guidance for the current block. We group similar preferences
and perform pairwise optimization across groups to improve
the performance of multi-preference alignment. Finally, as the
block flow matching training strategy significantly increases the
sequence length, we implement a high-compression music vari-
ational autoencoder (V AE), achieving high compression while
still enabling high-quality audio reconstruction. To encourage
reproducibility and further exploration, we will release the in-
ference code and model checkpoints. The main contributions of
this paper are summarized below:
• We propose DiffRhythm 2, a novel semi-autoregressive song
generation framework based on block flow matching, which
is capable of producing high-quality songs with faithful lyric
alignment and excellent accompaniment performance.
• We introduce stochastic block REPA loss to enable represen-
tation alignment in block flow matching, thereby enhancing
structural modeling and achieving remarkable coherence and
hierarchical structure in long-form song generation.
• We propose a cross-pair preference optimization strategy
to efficiently handle multi-preference alignment, which en-
hances final performance while reducing the number of opti-
mized models through a group-based optimization approach.
• We design a music V AE with low-frame-rate compression at
5 Hz that preserves reconstruction quality while reducing se-
quence length, which not only accelerates inference but also
makes long-sequence modeling in DiffRhythm 2 both feasi-
ble and effective.
2. Related Works
2.1. Flow Matching and Autoregressive Diffusion Model
Flow matching (FM) [20] trains continuous normalizing flows
(CNFs) without simulation by directly regressing a time-
dependent vector fieldvt(x)that transports samples from a sim-
ple priorp 0 to a target distributionp1 along pathspt. This yields
simpler objectives, faster convergence, and more stable train-
ing than score matching. Conditional flow matching (CFM)
further conditions the vector field on external information, en-
abling guided generation. CFM is widely used in the field of
image generation and has also been applied to TTS tasks in re-
cent years.
Autoregressive diffusion models aim to combine the
strengths of both autoregressive and non-autoregressive
paradigms, achieving complementary advantages. These
approaches can generally be categorized into two groups:
diffusion-backbone and language-model-backbone designs. For
diffusion-based backbones, the SSD series [21, 22] introduced
this idea and applied it to text generation tasks, with Block Dif-
fusion further optimizing the framework. ARDiT [23] extended
this line of work to text-to-speech (TTS). On the other hand,
language-model-based backbones include DiTAR [24], which
integrates diffusion mechanisms into autoregressive language
models.
2.2. Song Generation
Song generation aims to produce coherent vocals and accom-
paniment given lyrics and style specifications, requiring joint
modeling of melody, harmony, and lyric alignment. Early
methods adopted sequential pipelines: Melodist [25] and
MelodyLM [26] first generated vocals from lyrics, then syn-
thesized accompaniment. However, since vocals and accompa-
niment are inherently interdependent, this sequential approach
often produces suboptimal results. To address these limitations,
parallel generation methods emerged. SongCreator [10] and
Yue [11] generate vocals and accompaniment independently in
parallel, while SongGen [12] introduces interleaved prediction
across tracks to improve quality. Despite these advances, weak
coupling between vocal and instrumental tracks often leads to
harmonic inconsistencies. LeV o [13] mitigates this by first gen-
erating a mixed track, then using it to guide separate vocal and
accompaniment synthesis, achieving better harmony at the cost
of reduced accompaniment complexity. Recent work has ex-
plored alternative architectures to improve both quality and ef-
ficiency. MusicCoT [27] and Songbloom [28] leverage Chain-
of-Thought reasoning [29] to enhance vocal-accompaniment
coordination and overall generation quality. However, these
language-model-based approaches suffer from computational
overhead and struggle with style consistency across long se-
quences due to their autoregressive nature. Non-autoregressive
approaches offer promising alternatives. DiffRhythm [14] and
ACE-Step [15] employ diffusion models to achieve superior
long-sequence consistency and vocal-accompaniment harmony
while maintaining faster inference. However, both methods face
challenges in lyric alignment for extended sequences. While
each proposes specific solutions, these fixes come at the cost of
reduced creativity or musicality. Specifically, DiffRhythm relies
on timestamp conditioning while ACE-Step employs represen-
tation alignment, highlighting the need for more sophisticated
alignment strategies.
3. Method
3.1. Overview
The overall architecture of DiffRhythm 2, illustrated in Fig-
ure 1, comprises of a Music V AE and a Diffusion Transformer
enhanced with block flow matching. The Diffusion Transformer
is conditioned on lyricsLtogether with either text style prompt
St or audio style promptS a, and generates V AE latents block
by block. These latents are then passed to the Music V AE de-
coder to reconstruct the waveform. For training, in addition
to the block flow matching loss, we introduce the stochastic
block REPA loss combined with MuQ [30] representations to
enhance the model’s musicality and structural modeling. More-
over, to address the degraded average performance caused by
multi-preference optimization, we introduce a cross-pair pref-
erence optimization strategy. The following subsections will
provide detailed descriptions of the DiffRhythm 2 modules and
training procedure.
3.2. Music V AE
To address the challenge of training DiffRhythm 2 on extremely
long sequences, we design a customized Music V AE with a
frame rate as low as 5 Hz. The V AE processes 24 kHz input
audio as input and reconstructs it at 48 kHz, achieving com-
pression ratios of 4800× during encoding and 9600× during de-
coding. The Music V AE consists of an encoder, a transformer
4035
Rock,
Melancholic,
Drums,
Bass, Guitar
S L
Mulan
Decoder
Tokenizer Diffusion Transformer
[start]
[verse]
It's only been a day
But it's like I cant go on
I just wanna say
.....
S
L
style prompt
lyrics
i-th noise block
i-th clean block
clean block with EOP
Figure 1:Overview architecture of our proposed DiffRhythm 2. Either text description or audio can specify the style prompt.
block, and a decoder. The encoder adopts the same architec-
ture as Stable Audio 2 V AE 1[31]. A transformer block is in-
serted before the decoder to alleviate reconstruction pressure.
To maximize reconstruction quality, we employ BigVGAN [32]
as the decoder. For the training loss, we combine the multi-
scale mel loss from BigVGAN with the multi-scale STFT loss
from Stable Audio 2 V AE to jointly optimize vocals and ac-
companiment. In addition, we employ a set of discriminators,
including the multi-period discriminator, multi-scale discrimi-
nator, and CQT discriminator from BigVGAN.
Unlike MIMI [33], we deliberately avoid adding a similar
transformer block after the encoder for two reasons: (1) The
limited future information introduced by convolution helps en-
hance content continuity between consecutive blocks. (2) The
global bidirectional receptive field of transformer introduces ex-
cessive future information, substantially increasing the burden
on the generative model.
3.3. Block Flow Matching
3.3.1. Definition
We first establish the mathematical foundation of flow matching
before extending it to the block-wise setting. Given the target
latentZ, flow matching defines a linear probability path that
transports Gaussian noiseZ 0∼N(0,I)to the target data dis-
tributionZ. During training, the timesteptis sampled from
U[0,1], and the noisy latentZ t is obtained by linear interpola-
tion:
Zt = (1−t)Z 0 +tZ.(1)
The modelf θ conditions onZ t, style promptS, lyricsL, and
timesteptto estimate the velocity fieldˆv. Since the path is
linear, the ground truth velocity fieldvisZ−Z 0. The flow
matching loss is therefore defined as
Lfm =E[||ˆv−v||2
2

=E[||f θ(S,L,Z t,t)−(Z−Z 0)||2
2].(2)
In block flow matching, the core idea is that each block
is generated with flow matching, while the dependency across
blocks is handled autoregressively. Let the block size beb, and
split the target latentZof lengthlintoZ={z 1,z 2,···z k},
wherek=⌈l/b⌉denotes the total number of blocks. Since the
generation of each block depends on all previously generated
blocks, the velocity field for thei-th block is estimated as
ˆvi =f θ(S,L,z <i,zi
t,ti),(3)
1https://github.com/Stability-AI/stable-audio-tools
wherez <i represents all preceding blocks.z i
tis the noisy la-
tent for the current block obtained via linear interpolation, and
ti ∼ U[0,1]is sampled independently for each block. The
corresponding ground truth velocity for the i-th block isv i =
zi−zi
0, wherezi
0∼N(0,I)is the standard Gaussian noise for
this block. The overall block flow matching loss is then defined
as
Lbfm = 1
k
kX
i=1
E

||ˆvi−vi||2
2

= 1
k
kX
i=1
E

||fθ(S,L,z <i,zi
t,ti)−(z i−zi
0)||2
2

.
(4)
3.3.2. Details of Application
From the definition, block flow matching requires access to
clean block. While this is naturally available during inference,
the training input sequence typically consists only of(S,L,Z t)
without the clean blocks. To address this, we concatenate the
clean sequence to the noisy sequence, forming(S,L,Z,Z t),
and apply an attention mask to enforce autoregressive depen-
dencies. Figure 2 illustrates our attention mask design: the
style promptSand lyricsLcan be attended by any block; for
the clean sequence, thei-th block can only attend to blocks1
throughi; for the noisy sequence, thei-th block can only at-
tend to clean blocks1throughi−1and its own noisy block.
This design enforces autoregressive training but results in very
long input sequences. To alleviate this, we employ a 5 Hz music
V AE to substantially compress the training sequence length.
The introduction of clean sequences requires a mechanism
to distinguish them from noisy sequences to facilitate model
training. In conventional autoregressive frameworks, this is typ-
ically achieved by inserting special tokens as delimiters. How-
ever, such an approach is not applicable here. Since the re-
ceptive field is controlled by the attention mask, inserting de-
limiters for each block is impractical and would also affect
positional encoding. To address this in a simple yet effective
way, we leverage the timesteptto differentiate between se-
quences. Specifically, we set the style prompt and lyrics to a
fixed timestep of−1, the clean sequence to1, and assign the
noisy sequence a timestep sampled fromU[0,1]. To further
enhance training stability, different blocks within the same se-
quence are assigned independently sampled timesteps.
4036
Diffusion Transformer
S L SSL
Stochastic Block
REPA Loss
S
L
S L
S
L
style prompt
lyrics
i-th clean block
i-th noisy block
i-th velocity field
hidden state of i-th clean block
hidden state of i-th noisy block
ignore state
SSL SSL representation
Figure 2:The right panel shows the block-level latent sequence structure of the inputs and outputs, while the left panel shows the
corresponding attention mask applied during training. Note that the block size here is 2.
3.3.3. Variable Length Generation
Unlike prior works that predetermine the total sequence length
before generation, DiffRhythm 2 incorporates the End-of-
Prediction (EOP) frame as part of the prediction target to enable
variable length generation. Since generation proceeds block by
block, we padnEOP frames at the end of the sequence rather
than a single frame. Specifically,nis determined by the length
of the final blocklk:
n=l k modb.(5)
Ifl k is shorter than the block sizeb, EOPs are padded to com-
plete the block; ifl k equalsb, an additional full block of EOPs
is padded. Formally,
Z=concat(Z orig,repeat(EOP,n)).(6)
To design the EOP frame, we experimented with several distri-
butions. When the mean of the EOP distribution deviates sig-
nificantly from that of the latent, such as inN(1,1), the model
tends to generate strong noise near the end of the sequence.
When the two distributions are numerically close, such as in
N(0,2), prediction becomes unreliable since the model strug-
gles to recognize the stopping position. Moreover, because no
KL constraint is applied to the latent, enforcing a specific prob-
abilistic form for EOP further increases the modeling difficulty.
Overall, we find thatN(1,0), i.e., a constant vector of ones,
provides the most effective EOP representation, as it ensures
clear numerical separation from latent features while remaining
easy for the model to learn.
3.3.4. Training and Inference Procedures
The training and inference procedures are described in Algo-
rithms 1 and 2. It is worth noting that the incorporation of the
autoregressive mechanism allows us to enable KV cache at the
block level during inference, which substantially accelerates the
generation speed.
3.4. Stochastic Block REPA Loss
As REPA loss is no longer required for lyric alignment con-
straints, we repurpose it to improve the model’s musicality and
Algorithm 1Block Flow Matching Training
Require:forward noise processq t
repeat
tnoise←{t i∼U[0,1]|i= 1,...,k}
Zt←q tnoise (Z)
ˆv←fθ(S,L,Z,Z t,t noise)
θ←θ−η∇ θLbfm(ˆv)
untilconverged
Algorithm 2Block Flow Matching Inference
Require:max block numberN, sampling processSP, KV
cacheKV, model with KV cachem θ
Z←∅
∅,KV←m θ(S,L,∅,−1,∅)
fori= 1toNdo
zi
0∼N(0,I)
zi←SP(m θ,zi
0,KV)
∅,KV i←m θ(∅,∅,z i,1,KV)
KV←KV⊕KV i
Z←Z⊕z i
ifEOP∈z i then
break
end if
end for
returnZ
structural modeling. For the target SSL representations, extract-
ing them with the same block size as DiffRhythm 2 hinders the
capture of larger-scale musical structures. Moreover, SSL rep-
resentations are typically downsampled by multi-layer convo-
lution, which often introduces several frame shifts. The mis-
alignment betweenz i and SSL features caused by these shifts
makes it unreliable to calculate REPA loss on target block di-
rectly. A better solution is to compute the loss on the entire
sequence, which leverages the contextual receptive field to miti-
gate misalignment and enables the model to learn musical struc-
tures more effectively.
However, due to the block-wise training scheme, the hid-
4037
Table 1:Results of objective evaluations. The best results among commercial models are highlighted in bold, while the best results
among open-source models are underlined.
Model PER↓Mulan-T↑Mulan-A↑ Audio Aesthetics↑SongEval↑
CE CU PC PQ CO MU ME CL NA
SUNO V4.5 0.280.38-7.78 7.856.288.44 4.274.01 4.043.98 3.89
Mureka-O1 0.09 0.37 - 7.65 7.816.318.35 4.144.06 4.073.93 3.85
DiffRhythm+ 0.15 0.25 0.69 7.44 7.51 6.22 7.85 3.63 3.39 3.42 3.61 3.15
ACE-Step 0.23 0.28 - 7.26 7.51 6.25 7.79 3.77 3.46 3.58 3.56 3.38
LeV o 0.19 0.35 0.81 7.51 7.78 5.68 8.12 3.74 3.56 3.62 3.55 3.40
DiffRhythm 2 0.13 0.40 0.75 7.48 7.59 6.12 7.91 4.09 3.93 4.01 3.89 3.78
den statesh i−1
t andh i
t corresponding toz i−1
t andz i
t are not
continuous, making it infeasible to directly compute REPA loss
from the hidden stateH t ofZ t. Considering that training is
performed with teacher forcing, the hidden statesh <i andh i
t
corresponding toz<i andz i
t remain continuous. Thus, comput-
ing REPA loss on their combination is more reasonable. Note
that for anyt, the target is always the ground-truth SSL repre-
sentation. Therefore,tis only used to distinguish between noisy
and clean sequences.
In practice, a noisy sequence typically contains dozens of
blocks, so computing REPA loss for all of them is computa-
tionally expensive. Therefore, we randomly sample 10 blocks
per noisy sequence for loss computation. For clean sequences,
some blocks may be used multiple times for loss calculation. In
such cases, we assign weights such that the total weight of each
block sums to 1.
3.5. Cross-Pair Preference Optimization
Previous studies [18, 13] have demonstrated the effectiveness
and necessity of applying DPO for post-training in song gener-
ation tasks. As song generation involves multiple preference di-
mensions, multi-preference alignment optimization has become
increasingly important. Existing approaches typically rely on
merging separately optimized models. However, as the num-
ber of preferences increases, model merging often significantly
reduces the average performance across preferences, severely
limiting the overall efficiency of DPO.
We focus on four preference dimensions: musicality, style
similarity, lyric alignment accuracy, and audio quality. Indepen-
dent DPO experiments reveal complex interactions among these
dimensions: improving lyric alignment often compromises mu-
sicality; optimizing audio quality may enhance alignment but
weaken style similarity; while reinforcing style similarity tends
to benefit musicality. These observations indicate that prefer-
ences can be either conflicting or synergistic.
Motivated by these findings, we propose a cross-pair pref-
erence optimization strategy. Preferences are grouped by simi-
larity and paired across groups for pairwise optimization. Con-
flicting preferences are paired to mitigate trade-offs, while syn-
ergistic preferences are leveraged to enhance consistency across
optimized models. This design not only reduces the num