Demonstration of Embedded Systems for Clinical Speech Analysis
Jeremiah B Joyce ID 1,∗∗, Erik Clemens2, Sanjeev Mishra3, Josh Boesche2, David Johnson2, Marie
Reyes2
1 Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN USA
2 Division of Engineering, Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN USA
3 Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine, Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN USA
joyce.jeremiah@mayo.edu, clemens.erik@mayo.edu, mishra.sanjeev@mayo.edu,
boesche.joshua@mayo.edu, dmjohnson@mayo.edu, reyes.marie@mayo.edu
Abstract
Interest in applying computational speech analysis tools for
clinical purposes has grown alongside improvements in soft-
ware. However, many existing tools rely on specialized hard-
ware uncommon in routine clinical settings, separating data col-
lection, analysis, and reporting in both time and space. Embed-
ded systems can integrate sensors, graphics processing units,
and displays into a single bedside platform, enabling speech
analysis at the point of care. This approach could provide timely
results that can be incorporated into urgent clinical decision-
making.
Here, we demonstrate the novel use of an embedded system
to execute the core components of a computational speech anal-
ysis pipeline currently used to evaluate patients with psychiatric
disorders, enabling end-to-end processing directly at the bed-
side.
Index Terms: computational speech analysis, embedded de-
vices, psychiatry
1. Introduction
1.1. Clinical Speech Analysis
As spoken language reflects internal cognitive and emotional
processes, clinicians and researchers are increasingly interested
in measuring speech for clinical purposes. Several medical
fields, including psychiatry, neurology, and speech-language
pathology, have explored the use of readily available automated
speech analysis tools. However, many of these tools rely on
deep-learning models and require specialized hardware, such as
graphics processing units (GPU), to operate efficiently.
As a result, audio recorded in clinical environments must
be transferred elsewhere for processing, leading to delays and
introducing information technology (IT) barriers, including the
need to ensure secure transmission of patient data. Given clini-
cal time constraints, the urgent nature of many decisions, and
often limited IT infrastructure, these challenges restrict the
adoption of what could otherwise be a valuable clinical tool.
Encapsulating hardware for data collection, computation, and
display in a compact device would sidestep many of these chal-
lenges and allow unobtrusive deployment in a wide range of
clinical environments.
1.2. Embedded Systems
Embedded systems typically include electronic, software, and
possibly mechanical components that interact and provide spe-
cific dedicated functionality. These embedded devices are likely
**indicates the corresponding author.
to be independent devices but may be a component of a larger
system. Embedded systems exhibit the key features of per-
forming a single or small subset of tasks, containing limited
resources, including hardware and software that are tightly cou-
pled, and often responding to real-time events.
1.2.1. Benefits
Due to their task specific-architectures, embedded systems ben-
efit from lower power consumption, smaller size, ability to
work off-line, possible enhanced security, cost effectiveness,
and other qualities when compared to centralized computing
resources. These advantages are particularly valuable in low-
resource settings, including low- and middle-income countries
and outpatient mental health clinics with limited IT support.
2. Implementation Details
The demonstration will operate locally on an embedded device
running clinical speech analysis software, using a microphone
for audio data capture, a monitor for display, and basic input
devices.
Figure 1:Embedded System
2.1. Hardware Specifications
2.1.1. Embedded Device
The demonstration leverages an NVIDIA Jetson AGX Orin De-
veloper Kit, which features a 12-core, 2.2 GHz ARM CPU and
a 2048-core, 64 GB NVIDIA Ampere GPU. This 60 W system
has sufficient compute to process speech locally at faster-than-
4465
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia

audio time, removing the need to upload audio recordings for
analysis.
2.1.2. Microphone
The system can operate with any high-fidelity microphone.
While array microphones are used in a larger clinical space,
headset microphones are used for demonstration to enable both
audio capture and playback.
2.1.3. Display
The system connects to any DisplayPort-capable monitor to dis-
play analysis results. A wide screen display is best for viewing
long conversations.
2.1.4. Inputs
The system uses a standard computer mouse (not shown in Fig-
ure 1) to start/stop recording and allow the user to scroll, zoom,
and select various elements of the analysis dashboard.
2.2. Software
The Python software installed on the embedded device was de-
veloped as an end-to-end system for measuring speaker prosody
in clinical conversations. The preprocessing pipeline uses sev-
eral open-source libraries, along with internal modules, to parse
complex conversations into speakers, their roles, and tempo-
rally aligned segments of speech and silence. Clinically rele-
vant features for monitoring patients with mood disorders, in-
cluding speech rate, rhythm, and duration, are quantified using
standard linguistic formulas at the speaker and segment levels.
Results can be manually verified or edited using an interface
with ELAN, or presented in tabular or dashboard formats. Ad-
ditional details regarding methods and clinical utility are pro-
vided elsewhere.[1, 2]
Table 1:Preprocessing Pipeline
Preprocessing Stage Library
V oice Activity Detection pyannote-audio[3] v4.0.4
Speaker Diarization pyannote-audio[3] v4.0.4
Speaker Role Assignment Internal
Conversational Analysis Internal
Automatic Speech
Recognition
whisperx[4] v3.8.4
Forced Alignment BFA[5] v1.1.3
Acoustic Syllable
Detection
Syllable Nuclei[6] v3
Speech Emotion Recognition Internal
3. Demonstration
Once a user begins recording, they will see a message indicat-
ing that their speech is being captured. As recording completes,
the system analyzes the conversation, launching an interactive
conversation dashboard, which displays key conversation met-
rics. The dashboard provides summary speech rate and turn-
taking metrics, as well as a detailed view of turn-taking events,
word-level timestamps, and a speech spectrogram. Synchro-
nized audio playback allows users to review events of interest
while listening to the original audio.
If errors are found in the derived output, users can edit word
and utterance-level timestamps, transcriptions, and speaker at-
tributions using the ELAN software. Following manual cor-
rection, metrics can be quickly recalculated using the corrected
annotations.
Figure 2:End-to-End System Structure
4. Conclusion
Embedded systems offer several advantages for deploying AI
models compared to centralized computing systems, including
reduced cost and latency, improved data privacy, and offline
functionality. Historically, their limitations have centered on
model performance and runtime constraints. However, as em-
bedded hardware continues to advance, increasingly complex
edge AI applications are becoming feasible, expanding oppor-
tunities for clinical implementation.
Our demonstration shows that current embedded devices
are capable of running modern AI models, including deep learn-
ing neural networks and transformer architectures, necessary
for the end-to-end extraction of clinically relevant linguistic fea-
tures in near real-time. To our knowledge, this work represents
the first demonstration of using embedded devices for clinical
speech analysis.
5. Generative AI Use Disclosure
All content originated with the authors. ChatGPT (GPT-5.3;
OpenAI, USA) was used to assist with language editing. Final
content was reviewed and verified by the authors.