Effects of distributional bias in vowels and consonants on the Speech-to-Song 
Illusion 
Haruki Kagotani1, Hiroko Terasawa1, Makiko Sadakata2 
1 University of Tsukuba, Japan 
2 University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
S2621742@u.tsukuba.ac.jp, terasawa@slis.tsukuba.ac.jp, M.Sadakata@uva.nl 
 
Abstract 
This study investigates how the distribution of phonemes in 
speech samples  (proportions and types of vowels and 
consonants) as well as the  instruction method (either speech -
song or speech -rap scale) affect the perceived strength of  the 
Speech-to-Song (STS) illusion. We conducted a  listening 
experiment with 120 native Japanese-speakers using Japanese 
short phrases in which the  distribution of phonemes  was 
systematically manipulated. Participants rated song-likeness or 
rap-likeness of stimuli before and after repeated presentation of 
the phrases . Results revealed that stimuli with  biased 
vowel/consonant distribution  elicited significantly stronger 
illusions than non -biased counterparts. Moreover, the Rap 
instruction (the instruction to judge rap -likeness rather than 
song-likeness) yielded consistently higher ratings than the Song 
instruction. These results demonstrate both phonological 
structure of stimuli and listening modes play important roles in 
perception of the STS illusion. 
Index Terms : Speech-to-Song illusion, distributional bias in 
phoneme occurrence, instructional priming, song-likeness, rap-
likeness. 
1. Introduction 
1.1. The Speech-to-Song Illusion 
The Speech-to-Song (STS) illusion is a perceptual phenomenon 
in which a short spoken-phrase transforms from  a speech to a 
song when the phrase is repeated for multiple times  [1], [2]. 
This illusion itself depicts some boundary between speech and 
music. Many researchers have been questioning which factors 
in speech are critical to cause this transformation, with the hope 
to find the “dividers” between speech and music. Our study 
inherits that perspective, and we investigate the effect of 
rhyming, the distributional biases of vowels and consonants in 
spoken phrases, on the perceptions of song -likeness and rap -
likeness.  
Previous studies have primarily focused on prosodic 
features as the main factors driving this illusion. For instance, 
Tierney et al. [3] conducted an acoustic analysis of phrases that 
readily elicit the illusion, reporting that pitch stability and well-
defined pitch intervals  are key factors that facilitate the 
transformation. Similarly, Falk et al. [4] focused on temporal 
structure, indicating that rhythmic regularity in speech 
facilitates the perceptual shift from language to music.   
The intensity of the STS illusion also depends heavily on 
the listener's characteristics and cultural background. Tierney et 
al. [5] re ported that listeners with higher basic musical 
aptitude—such as better beat and tonality perception  and 
greater attention to pitch —perceive the STS illusion more 
strongly. Furthermore, Groenveld et al. [6], using the Gold -
MSI, reported that higher musical sophistication modestly 
decreased the repetition effect  in STS ratings.  Linguistic 
background is also a crucial factor. Jaisin et al. [7] reported that 
the STS illusion is less likely to occur in listeners of tone 
languages, suggesting that the interference of linguistic 
processing competes with musical perception. In Japanese (a 
pitch-accent language), Ono [8] showed that the speech-to-song 
transformation occurs in both native and non -native listeners. 
However, the illusion appears weaker in Japanese than in 
English. 
Regarding why repeated speech can be heard as song , 
several accounts emphasize reduced access to linguistic 
representations, such as semantic satiation.  Margulis et al. [9] 
reported that the STS illusion is more likely to occur with 
foreign languages that are difficult to pronounce compared to a 
native language, suggesting that when linguistic processing is 
less accessible, perception is less strongly anchored to a speech 
interpretation.  In a related account, Castro et al. [10] conducted 
a theoretical investigation using Node Structure Theory (NST), 
arguing that continuous repetition causes a temporary 
suspension of word semantic processing  which subsequently 
brings the suppressed acoustic and phonological information to 
the surface. Moreover, Rathcke et al. [11] compared 
semantically plausible phrases with less plausible ones, 
revealing that phrases with lower semantic plausibility and 
higher syntactic complexity facilitate the illusion more 
effectively. 
While the importance of prosody and semantics is well 
established, some studies also focus on the phonological 
characteristics of speech.  Vitevitch et al. [12] suggested that 
phonological factors may play a larger role than semantic 
content in shaping the STS illusion.  At the segmental level, 
Rathcke et al.  [13] pointed out that sonority in syllable structure 
may facilitate the illusion. Additionally, Hiemstra and Sadakata 
[14] compared vowel acoustics (F1/F2 vowel space) between 
stimuli that tend to elicit the STS illusion and those that tend 
not to, and found that illusion -eliciting stimuli have a smaller 
vowel space (more centralized vowels).  
Previous research on the Speech-to-Song (STS) illusion has 
investigated a wide range of factors, including acoustic, 
linguistic, and listener properties . However, the effect of 
distributional bias —such as a biased distribution of similar 
phonemes— within stimuli has not yet been directly tested in 
the STS paradigm. Our focus on distributional bias was inspired 
by rap music. In rap, similar phonological patterns such as 
rhymes can make a speech sound musical even when melodic 
structure is minimal. This points to the possibility that such 
distributional bias may modulate the STS illusion. While 
previous studies have mainly focused on prosodic and semantic 
factors, the present study examines whether phonological 
distributional structure itself contributes to the musicalization 
of speech. This perspective may provide further insight into 
how listeners perceive the boundary between speech, poetry, 
rap, and song. 
1.2. Purpose of the Study 
In this study, we created Japanese short phrases with artificially 
manipulated occurrence rates of  vowel and consonant as 
auditory stimuli to investigate the effect of distributional bias in 
stimuli on the STS illusion. Furthermore, we extended the 
instruction beyond the traditional “song-likeness” to include 
“rap-likeness,” where a rhythmic element  is emphasized, to 
address the following two hypotheses. 
729
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2956
The first hypothesis is that distributional bias within speech 
stimuli, would facilitate the STS illusion. We predict that the 
repetition of biased phon ological information interferes with 
verbal processing, thereby shifting attention toward acoustic 
aspects of the sound.  
The second hypothesis predicts that the instruction to rate 
between speech and rap (Rap instruction) will yield higher  
perceived illusion strength than the Song instruction. We think 
that the traditional song-likeness metric m ay guide  listeners' 
attention toward pitch characteristics, such as stability and well-
defined pitch intervals. Consequently, pitch instability, which 
is more prevalent in natural speech than in song,  could lead to 
limited experience of the transformation effect as “music”, 
whereas other aspects, such as perceived rhythmic regularity, 
may already have been experienced as musical. However, not 
all music relies on melodic elements as its core. In contrast to 
traditional song s in the common Western music , “rap” 
prioritizes rhythmic regularity and rhyme over melodic 
structure. Therefore, we hypothesize that the cognitive 
framework of “rap” has a higher affinity for natural speech 
stimuli. Specifically, we predict that this tendency will be more 
pronounced in stimuli containing distributional biases. 
2. Distributional bias 
To investigate the effect of distributional bias  on the STS 
illusion, we constructed short Japanese phrases across four 
conditions: Non -bias, Vowel -bias-only, Consonant -bias-only, 
and Both-bias. 
Here, “bias” refers to a state in which specific phonological 
elements occur with high frequency within a phrase. Table 1 
presents examples of the generated stimuli. For example, in the 
stimulus /akarasama  na takara/, all vowels consist of /a/. 
Similarly, in /tabekobo ʃite kudaku/, all consonants are 
obstruents, with 8 out of 9 being plosives. Stimuli were 
constructed by manipulating the occurrence of vowel and 
consonant based on the criteria described below. 
Table 1: Stimuli examples 
Condition Stimulus 
Non-bias /neko ga tʃizu o miteru/ 
Vowel-bias-only /akarasama na takara/ 
Consonant-bias-only /tabekoboʃite kudaku/ 
Both-bias /papa daga kaba tataku/ 
2.1. Vowel Manipulation 
Vowel distributional bias  was manipulated by intentionally 
repeating specific phonemes from the five Japanese vowels (/a/, 
/i/, /u/, /e/, /o/) and the moraic nasal (/N/) within a phrase. To 
quantify the degree of bias, we calculated the Shannon entropy 
of the vowel occurrence freq uency in each phrase to confirm 
the concentration on specific vowels.  It ranged from 0.00 to 
2.50, where greater value indicates a more uniform distribution 
of vowels. 
2.2. Consonant Manipulation 
Consonant distributional bias  was manipulated by increasing 
the acoustic and articulatory similarity between consonants. In 
this experiment, to clarify differences in auditory rhythm and 
timbre, we adopted a classification based on the major manner 
of articulation. Specifically, conso nants were categorized into 
sonorants (comprising nasals, liquids, and glides), 
characterized by continuous and smooth acoustic energy, and 
obstruents (comprising plosives, fricatives, and affricates), 
where rhythmic segmentation is emphasized by airflow closure 
or friction. Consonant bias was established by controlling the 
occurrence rates of these two categories, systematically 
manipulating the Shannon entropy. It ranged from 0.00 to 0.99, 
where greater value indicates a more uniform distribution of 
consonants. 
In creating the stimuli, our top priority was to 
experimentally maximize the distributional bias in phoneme 
categories. Therefore, we maximized the frequency of specific 
phoneme types while using real Japanese words , adhering 
Japanese phonotactic rules, and maintaining a fixed length of 9 
morae. As a trade -off for this constraint, some of the resulting 
phrases have low semantic coherence or contain vocabulary 
combinations that are uncommon in natural speech. 
3. Experimental Method 
3.1. Participants 
Participants were 120 adult native speakers of Japanese with 
normal hearing. They were recruited via the crowdsourcing 
service Lancers, and the experiment was conducted online 
using the OpenLab platform. Participants were instructed to 
wear headphones or earphones in a quiet environment to ensure 
concentration. The study was approved by the Research Ethics 
Committee of the Faculty of Library, Information and Media 
Science, University of Tsukuba (Approval No. 25-69, 25-111). 
3.2. Stimuli 
We used a total of 40 speech stimuli, consisting of 
approximately 10 phrases for each of the four conditions 
defined by a 2 × 2 design manipulating vowel and consonant 
biases. Each stimulus was adjusted to approximately 9 morae in 
length, normalized to a p eak amplitude of -3 dB, and had a 
duration ranging from 1.0 to 1.5 seconds. The stimuli were 
recorded by a male native Japanese speaker who received 
professional announcer training. To prevent the experimenters’ 
intentions from influencing the recordings, the speaker was kept 
blind to the research hypotheses. Recordings were made in a 
low-noise environment using a condenser microphone (Audio-
Technica AT4040) and an audio interface (Steinberg UR22C).  
Using editing software (Audacity 2.3.3), silence at the 
beginning and end of utterances was trimmed. To prevent 
loading delays in the online experiment, audio files were 
converted to MP3 format (stereo, 320 kbps). 
 
3.3. Procedure 
In order to avoid order effects, a counterbalancing design was 
implemented. The auditory stimuli were divided into two sets 
(Set X and Set Y) consisting of 20 stimuli each, which were 
adjusted to ensure that the four distributional bias conditions 
were bal anced between the two sets. In this experiment, 
participants completed two evaluation blocks under different 
instructions (Song and Rap).  As shown in Table 2, each 
participant completed two blocks with different instruction–set 
pairings, such that Set X was used in one block and Set Y in the 
other (counterbalanced across groups). Participants were 
randomly assigned to one of four groups (Pa rticipants 0 –3) 
based on the combination of instruction order (Song/Rap) and 
stimulus set (Set X/Set Y). Within each block, the presentation 
order of the 20 stimuli was randomized for each participant. 
3.3.1. Questionnaires 
Prior to the main experimental tasks, a questionnaire survey 
was conducted to assess participants' musical and linguistic 
backgrounds. As an objective measure of musical 
sophistication, the Japanese version of the Goldsmiths Musical 
Sophistication Index (Gold-MSI) [15] was used. Additionally, 
participants were asked about factors relevant to the 
experimental conditions, including their frequency of listening 
to and preference for rap music, as well as their history of 
dialect use (place of residence and upbringing), wh ich could 
potentially influence speech perception. 
730
3.3.2. Song Evaluation Block 
In this block, trials were conducted for each auditory stimulus 
in the assigned set. The procedure for each trial was as follows: 
First, participants listened to the stimulus once (single 
exposure) and immediately rated its “song -likeness” on a 7 -
point Lik ert scale (1: Completely perceived as speech – 7: 
Completely perceived as song). Subsequently, they listened to 
ten repetitions of the same stimulus (inter -stimulus interval: 
400 ms) and rated its “song -likeness” again using the same 
scale. Additionally, they rated their subjective understanding of 
the phrase on a 7 -point Likert scale (1: Did not understand at 
all – 7: Completely understood). 
3.3.3. Rap Evaluation Block 
The trial procedure and presentation conditions in this block 
were identical to those in the Song Evaluation Block, except 
that participants evaluated “rap -likeness” instead of “song -
likeness.” Immediately after both the single and repeated 
exposures, participants rated “rap-likeness” on a 7-point Likert 
scale (1: Completely perceived as speech – 7: Completely 
perceived as rap) and their “subjective understanding” of the 
phrase. 
Table 2: Counter Balance Scheme 
Group 1st Block 2nd Block 
Participants 0 Rap (with Set X) Song (with Set Y) 
Participants 1 Rap (with Set Y) Song (with Set X) 
Participants 2 Song (with Set X) Rap (with Set Y) 
Participants 3 Song (with Set Y) Rap (with Set X) 
 
4. Results 
Figures 1 and 2 summarize the experimental results. Figure 1 
shows the mean “song-likeness” or “rap-likeness” ratings for 
each stimulus condition  (Non-bias, Vowel -bias-only, 
Consonant-bias-only, and Both-bias) before and after repetition. 
Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals (CIs) estimated 
via bootstrapping, reflecting uncertainty in the population mean. 
Figure 2 visualizes the mean perceptual change (post-repetition 
minus pre-repetition ratings), which is less apparent in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Changes in mean ratings of “song-likeness” and 
“rap-likeness” before and after repetition across stimulus 
conditions. 
 
 
Figure 2: Mean perceptual change (post-repetition minus pre-
repetition ratings) in “song-likeness” and “rap-likeness” 
across stimulus conditions. 
4.1. Repeated Measures ANOVA 
A three-way repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
was conducted with Instruction (Song/Rap), Vowel Bias 
(Present/Absent), and Consonant Bias (Present/Absent) as 
factors. Repeated-measures ANOVA was adopted because the 
hypotheses concerned conditio n-level effects in a balanced 
experimental design. To assess the intensity of the STS illusion, 
the dependent variable was defined as the mean perceptual 
change (post -repetition minus pre -repetition rating), 
corresponding to the values presented in Figure 2. The analysis 
revealed significant main effects for all three factors. 
Regarding the instruction condition, the main effect was 
significant ( 𝐹(1,119) = 6.20, 𝑝 = .014, 𝜂2 = .011 ). The 
magnitude of change in the Rap instruction ( 𝑀 = 0.95, 𝑆𝐸 =
0.069) was significantly larger than that in the Song instruction 
( 𝑀 = 0.84, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.070 ). This suggests that, overall, the 
instruction to listen to the stimuli as rap facilitates the illusion, 
regardless of the presence of distributional bias.  
Furthermore, significant main effects were also found for 
both Vowel Bias ( 𝐹(1,119) = 19.11, 𝑝 < .001, 𝜂2 = .033 ) 
and Consonant Bias  ( 𝐹(1,119) = 19.90, 𝑝 < .001, 𝜂2 =
.019). The mean perceptual change was significantly larger 
when vowel distributional bias was present ( 𝑀 = 1.00, 𝑆𝐸 =
0.074 ) than when it was absent ( 𝑀 = 0.80, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.064 ). 
Similarly, the presence of consonant bias resulted in a larger 
change (𝑀 = 0.97, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.070) compared to its absence (𝑀 =
0.82, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.066).  
Crucially, a significant two -way interaction was observed 
only between Vowel Bias and Consonant Bias ( 𝐹(1,119) =
6.25, 𝑝 = .014, 𝜂2 = .006 ). In contrast, no significant 
interactions were found between Instruction and either 
distributional bias. This lack of interaction between instruction 
and stimulus properties suggests that the effect of distributional 
bias was present under both instruction conditions. 
Given the significant interaction between Vowel Bias and 
Consonant Bias, we conducted Bonferroni -corrected simple 
effect analysis. The analysis revealed that the Non -bias 
condition elicited significantly lower ratings compared to all 
other conditions ( all 𝑝𝑠 < .001 ). Specifically, the mean 
differences were -0.28, -0.23, and -0.35 when compared to the 
Vowel-bias-only, Consonant -bias-only, and Both -bias 
conditions, respectively, indicating that the Non-bias condition 
was uniquely lower in perceived song/rap-likeness. 
In contrast, no significant differences were observed among 
the conditions containing distributional bias (the Vowel -bias-
only, Consonant -bias-only, and Both -bias conditions) ( 𝑝𝑠 >
731
.10). Although the Both -bias condition exhibited the highest 
mean likeness difference, it did not differ significantly from 
either of the single -bias conditions. Overall, these results 
suggest that the presence of either vowel or consonant 
distributional bias  increased perceived song/rap -likeness 
relative to the fully non -biased condition. However, the 
combined presence of both biases did not result in significantly 
higher ratings than either distributional bias alone. 
5. Discussion 
In this study, we investigated the effects of distributional bias 
and instruction methods on the STS illusion. The analysis 
revealed significant main effects for all factors (Vowel Bias, 
Consonant Bias, and Instruction). However, no significant 
interactions were found between the Instruction condition and 
the stimulus conditions (Vowel/Consonant Bias). Based on 
these results, we discuss the influence of phonological factors 
and instruction methods below. 
5.1. Effect of Distributional bias 
First of all, we report that Rap-likeness showed similar patterns 
as song-likeness, as our novel finding. 
The first hypothesis, that “distributional bias facilitates the 
STS illusion,” was strongly supported. Specifically, speech 
stimuli containing vowel or consonant distributional biases 
were perceived more as song or rap compared to non -biased 
stimuli.   
Furthermore, the post-hoc analysis revealed that while the 
absence of either bias resulted in the weakest illusion, the 
presence of either vowel distributional bias alone or consonant 
distributional bias alone was sufficient to significantly enhance 
the perceptual change. Although the combination of both biases 
exhibited the highest numerical value, it did not significantly 
differ from the single -bias conditions. These results suggest 
that the presence of either vowel or consonant distributional 
bias alone is sufficient to facilitate the illusion. 
5.2. Effect of Instruction Method 
The second hypothesis, that “the instruction to listen as 'Rap' 
would enhance the intensity of the illusion, and that this effect 
would be specifically amplified by distributional bias,” was not 
directly supported, as the interaction between the Instruction 
condition and distributional bias was not significant. However, 
the main effect of the Instruction condition was significant; the 
Rap instruction  consistently elicited a higher magnitude of 
perceptual change than the Song instruction, regardless of the 
presence or absence of bias in the stimuli. 
We attribute this result to the “boundary characteristics” of 
rap, which lies between speech and music. Generally, stable 
pitch structures (melody) are considered an important element 
in listening as a “Song”. However, since the stimuli in this 
experiment were based on natural speech, they contained 
significant pitch fluctuations, making them difficult to fit into 
the traditional framework of a “song” in the common Western 
music. Consequently, the perception of the stimuli as music was 
likely hindered in the Song instruction. In contrast, “rap” is a 
genre that prioritizes rhythmically organized structures while 
tolerating pitch fluctuations close to natural speech. Due to this 
difference, applying the “Rap” framework likely facilitated the 
perception of the stimuli as musical objects, even for natural 
speech with intense pitch fluctuations.   
These results suggest that the musical transformation in the 
STS illusion is not limited to traditional “song-likeness”; rather, 
the illusion can also manifest through alternative forms of 
musicality, such as rap.  The present study intentionally used 
natural speech stimuli to examine the effect of phonological 
distributional bias under ecologically valid conditions. Future 
work should investigate the contribution of prosodic factors 
such as pitch stability and rhyt hmic regularity alongside 
phonological structure.  
6. Conclusions 
Our findings demonstrate that distributional bias systematically 
enhances musicalization, with biased stimuli eliciting stronger 
transformation effects than non -biased stimuli. Extending 
previous research that has primarily emphasized prosodic 
features, th is study shows that segmental -level phonological 
structure can also shape the emergence of perceived musicality. 
In addition, the newly introduced speech -to-rap scale may 
capture a broader range of musicalization effects than the 
traditional speech-to-song framework, encompassing not only 
melodic transformation but also repetition -induced rhythmic 
organization. 
7. Future Works 
While the present study provides evidence that distributional 
biases of vowels and consonants, as well as instruction 
(Song/Rap), influence the perceived strength of the Speech-to-
Song (STS) illusion, several issues remain for future research. 
First, a more fine -grained analysis is needed to evaluate 
whether distributional bias contributes to the STS illusion 
beyond factors that have been suggested to influence it. 
Previous work has shown that prosodic factors such as pitch 
stability, well-defined pitch intervals, and rhythmic regularity 
can strongly drive the STS illusion. Future studies should 
therefore model these acoustic indices at the stimulus level and 
t