Perceptual and Acoustic Correlates of Racial Identity in Text-to-Speech V oices
Noah Khaloo1,∗∗, Nicole Holliday2, Sarah Creel1
1University of California, San Diego, United States
2 University of California, Berkeley, United States
nkhaloo@ucsd.edu, nicole.holliday@berkeley.edu, screel@ucsd.edu
Abstract
V oice-activated artificial intelligence (V oice-AI) systems are in-
creasingly human-like in production, raising questions regard-
ing how these synthetic voices are socially perceived. In this
study, we show that listeners are generally capable of perceiv-
ing a sense of speaker race when hearing synthesized speech,
and that they even engage in racial stereotyping. We do, how-
ever, see a bias towards rating voices as sounding ’White’. To
explore this, we train a Gradient Boosted Decision Tree clas-
sifier on acoustic features to distinguish between voices rated
as Black from White. Our model performs with an accuracy
of 65%. From this analysis, we find that voices with lower
Residual H1* and spectral tilt in the lower/higher frequencies
are more regularly rated as Black. Noise measurements, as well
as formants (F1, F2, and F4), also seem to vary reliably between
race labels. These results have implications regarding the devel-
opment, use, and efficacy of racially-marked AI
Index Terms: Text-to-Speech, Acoustic Phonetics
1. Introduction
Research has shown that listeners can ascertain information
about any given individual’s personality and/or their emotional
state, just from the sound of their voice [1, 2, 3, 4]. This phe-
nomenon applies to racial perception as well. For example,
American English listeners have been shown to reliably distin-
guish between White and Black Americans, based on phonetic
features associated with Mainstream American English (MAE)
and African American English (AAE), even in the absence of
syntactic or morphosyntactic cues [5, 6]. In addition, the per-
ception of race in voice interacts with the perception of the in-
dividual’s personality and/or social status. This has been shown
repeatedly with American English listeners, who tend to view
voices they hear as ‘sounding Black’ more negatively in differ-
ent social or emotional contexts [5, 6].
With recent advances in V oice-AI, synthetic speech is in-
creasingly capable of sounding human-like in their production.
As speech technology continues to be deployed in high-stakes
contexts such as education, healthcare, customer service, and
assistive technologies, understanding the social attributes en-
coded in these voices take on practical and ethical value.
Along these lines, studies have attempted to encode race in
synthetic TTS speech [7, 8], though the efficacy of this remains
questionable. While some studies working with American En-
glish speakers report that listeners converge on race labels when
hearing TTS voices [9], others find that Black-sounding syn-
thetic voices are difficult to identify, and that there is a bias
towards rating TTS voices as ‘White’ [7].
**indicates the corresponding author.
Following methodology set forth in [9], the current study
aims to identify whether perception of race is possible in
fully synthesized speech, particularly when listeners are aware
that they are listening to synthetic speech. We also test
whether perception of race interacts with personality assess-
ment of any given voice. We focus on the distinction be-
tween White American-sounding voices and Black American-
sounding voices, as the notion of racial perception and its in-
teraction with personality assessment for these populations in
human speech has been well documented. Given that we are
working with fully synthetic speech, we also aim to test the im-
pact that so-called ’human-likeness’ has on perception of iden-
tity with synthetic speech, as human-likeness in synthetic voices
promotes anthropomorphism and stronger personality attribu-
tion [10, 11].
In this study, we also aim to quantify the acoustic differ-
ences that exist between synthetic voices labeled as Black ver-
sus White by our listeners. This is important, as differences in
the acoustic signal drive racial categorization in human speech.
With this in mind, it is well documented that AAE has a dif-
ferent vowel system than MAE [12, 13, 14]. Specifically, the
vowels/E, æ, I/undergo raising relative to MAE [14]. The
monophthongization of/eI/and/aI/[15], the fronting of/A/
[16], and the centralization of/i/[12] relative to MAE have
also been documented. We target these vowels specifically in
our study. Much less work has examined vowel-independent
acoustic features differentiating AAE from MAE. However, ex-
isting research suggests that AAE speakers exhibit greater noise
in their acoustic signal [5], indicating that AAE speakers may
produce speech with a breathier register than MAE speakers.
For these reasons, we make an effort to compare both vowel
quality and voice quality measures across racially-labeled syn-
thetic voices.
For this experiment, we synthesize voices using an online
platform called EasyPeasy AI. We use this platform because
they provide a web-based interface with a large variety of avail-
able voices to be used for TTS synthesis. Consent to utilize
the voices for the purposes of this study was provided by Easy-
Peasy AI, though explicit information about underlying model
structure and training data was not given.
2. Methods
2.1. Experiment
The experiment was hosted on Github pages using a cus-
tom web-based interface developed using HTML, CSS, and
JavaScript. 150 American English speakers without speech and
hearing disorders were recruited using Prolific. Data from six
participants were dropped due to them being unable to complete
the entire study, leaving 144 total participants. An ethnically
4009
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1479
representative sample was chosen, with 54% of participants in
our study self-identifying as White, 11.8% as Black, 6.94% as
Asian, 18.1% as Hispanic/Latino American, and 9% as other.
In addition, 56.6% of the participants identified as male, and
43.1% as female. Participants were also distributed across age
groups: 6.3% were aged 18–24, 36.1% were aged 25–34, 27.8%
were aged 35–44, 18.8% were aged 45–54, and 11.1% were
aged 55 or older.
V oices were synthesized on August 20th, 2025. For this
study, we focused on English, and utilized two of the available
English ‘Accents’ on the platform: American, which refers to
Mainstream American English, and African American, refer-
ring to African American English. For each voice, the platform
assigns a picture of what the voice might look like if belong-
ing to a real person and a short qualitative description of the
voice. Gender (Male/Female) was also labeled by the platform.
A voice was considered by the authors as being labeled Black
if it was found in the African American tab on the platform,
and had a image of a Black person in its description 1. Like-
wise, a voice was considered as being labeled as White if it fell
into the American tab and was given an image of a White per-
son. Images were not not shown to our participants during the
experiment. The gender of the voice was taken directly from
the qualitative description. From here on out, we refer to the
Black/White and Male/Female labels originally assigned to the
voices as the platform-assigned labels. Of the total number of
viable voices labeled as Black or White, 18 were filtered out by
the first author due to it consistently producing output with poor
audio quality.
After voices were aggregated based on their labels, a total of
32 voices were randomly selected, organized by their platform-
assigned label: eight labeled as Black Males, eight labeled as
Black Females, eight labeled as White Males, and eight labeled
as White Females. The number eight was chosen as that was the
maximum number of Black Males on the platform at the time
of random sampling.
The experiment was divided into two main blocks: Person-
ality and Race. Upon agreeing to the study, participants were
informed that they would be hearing synthetic (non-human)
speech. Each participant first completed the personality block
where they heard 16 randomly selected voices (balanced by
race/gender) reading the first six sentences of the Rainbow Pas-
sage [17]. For each trial, participants were prompted to rate
the voice they heard on six personality characteristics, using 7-
point likert scales: friendliness, professionalism, competence,
trustworthiness, pleasantness, and funniness [9]. Participants
were also asked to rate the human-likeness of the voice on a
7-point scale.
Participants were then prompted to complete the Race
block, which contained the 16 voices not used in the Person-
ality block. Each trial consisted of a voice saying one of four
sentences, each targeting specific vowels. Sentences avoided
phonological features associated with AAE such as fortition,
r-deletion, NG-fronting, or syllable-final nasal/liquid deletion,
ensuring that the cues listeners may use to differentiate race
only come from voice/vowel quality. For each trial, participants
were asked about the voice’s race, age, and region in the form
of multiple choice questions. Race was of particular interest
1Since the image that the platform assigned helped the authors de-
termine the platform-assigned race, a small norming study (n=11) was
done to confirm whether the photos were actually representative of the
race they were denoting. Results show 100% agreement with the plat-
form.
for this study, with other categories included to disguise our
exact hypothesis. The categorical options presented to listen-
ers for race judgments were Asian, Black, Hispanic/Latino, or
White. The gender of the voice was also assessed for each trial,
being put on a 7-point likert scale from Feminine-sounding to
Masculine-sounding. There were 64 trials total.
In both blocks, participants were only presented with audio,
with no visual cues that could encode voice identity. All audio
was amplitude normalized to 72 dB using a Praat script.
Upon completion of the experiment, participants were
prompted to answer a series of demographic questions pertain-
ing to their own race, region, gender, age, and exposure to AI
technology.
2.2. Acoustic variables
To define a theoretically grounded set of acoustic variables, we
employed the Psychoacoustic Model of the V oice (Kreiman et
al., 2014; 2021), which characterizes voice quality along per-
ceptually motivated temporal and spectral dimensions that can
be parameterized acoustically. We choose this feature set in or-
der to maintain interpretability of our modeling results.
Following a protocol laid out in [18], we extracted fun-
damental frequency (F0), the first four formant frequencies
(F1–F4), and formant dispersion (DF), defined as the mean
spacing between adjacent formants in hertz. Harmonic source
measures were also extracted, including Residual H1* 2,
H2*–H4*, H4*–H2kHz*, and H2kHz*–H5kHz*, all of which
were formant-corrected. We also extract measurements related
to inharmonic source characteristics: Cepstral Peak Prominence
(CPP), Subharmonic-to-Harmonic ratio (SHR), and Energy.
Acoustic variables were extracted at 1-ms frames using
V oiceSauce [20] for each vowel token. Frame-level outliers
were identified and excluded using a median absolute devia-
tion (MAD) procedure [21], with a threshold of k = 3.5. All
frames for each acoustic variables were then normalized by the
minimum and maximum value for that feature within gender.
Next, each vowel token was divided into three equal tem-
poral segments relative to its total duration, corresponding to
vowel onset, midpoint, and offset. For each vowel token, we
computed the mean and the Coefficient of Variability (CoV) of
all the acoustic variables at onset, midpoint, and offset. For ex-
ample, a vowel with a duration of 150 ms would be segmented
into three consecutive 50-ms intervals, and mean/CoV would be
calculated at each interval, across all acoustic variables. CoV is
defined as the standard deviation divided by the mean and has
been shown to effectively capture perceptually relevant variabil-
ity in acoustic measures [22, 23, 24, 18].
Measurements were then centered relative to their phona-
tion modality (i.e., breathy, creaky, breathy-creaky) with
modality-specific means calculated separately for each vowel.
Modality was assessed by the first author during segmenta-
tion, based on visual examination of the spectrogram and wave-
form. This approach was intended to reduce acoustic variance
attributable to phonation types. The normalized/centered mean
and CoV values for each acoustic variable at vowel onset, mid-
point, and offset across tokens were used as features in the clas-
sification model (see §2.3).
2We use Residual H1* which is the amplitude of the first harmonic,
normalized by root mean square energy, rather than the more common
spectral tilt measure H1-H2, as it is better correlated with glottal state
[19].
4010
2.3. Gradient Boosted Decision Tree learning
Gradient boosting is a supervised machine learning technique
that builds a predictive model by combining a series of weak
learners. Each weak learner is trained to minimize a loss func-
tion, gradually improving performance. The model used in this
study was used to distinguish between voices rated as Black and
voices rated as White. To analyze our data, we use the R pack-
age XGBoost [25].
Optimal model hyper-parameters and number of boosting
rounds were chosen by conducting a full grid search using
five-fold cross-validation (CV). CV was repeated 50 times per
model. CV folds were defined at the speaker level, such that all
tokens produced by a given speaker were assigned to the same
fold. This ensures that any speaker who was used in a given
training fold did not appear in a corresponding test fold. The
hyper-parameter values that resulted in the highest average ac-
curacy on test folds were chosen for subsequent testing. The
final model used 50 boosting rounds, a maximum tree depth of
4, a learning rate ofη= 0.1, a minimum child weight of 1, and
a gamma ofγ= 0. A model with the tuned hyper-parameters
and iterations was fit to the entirety of the data and used for
calculation of feature importance (see §3.3).
3. Results
3.1. Perceptually-assigned Race labels
Agreement between platform-assigned gender labels and par-
ticipant ratings was high (Male: 98.6%; Female: 93.6%), col-
lapsed across race. Accordingly, platform-assigned gender was
treated as the ’true’ gender of the voice in all subsequent analy-
ses.
Perceptually grounded race labels (e.g., ’true’ race labels),
rather than platform-assigned labels, were derived via k-means
clustering, run on %Reported Black (i.e., the % of time any par-
ticular voice was rated as ’Black’) (RB). RB values were stan-
dardized prior to clustering, and a three-cluster solution was
selected. Based on the resulting distributions on RB, clusters
were interpreted as voices consistently identified as White (∼0–
20%), Black (∼50–100%), or Ambiguous (∼20–50%). In other
words, race categories for our voices were relabeled based on
their cluster assignment. Note that the distribution of the cluster
denoting Black-sounding voices is larger than the cluster denot-
ing White-sounding voices, indicating more rater-variability for
Black-sounding voices, and suggesting a general bias towards
rating voices as White.
Importantly, a majority (5/9) of the voices categorized as
Ambiguous were labeled by the platform as ’Black Female’, in-
dicating that people had a harder time identifying Black Female
voices, as seen with human voices [6].
3.2. Personality Results
Figure 1 shows the ratings for each trait across the perceptually-
assigned race categories for voices across both gender labels.
Per-trait linear mixed-effects models were fit with fixed
effects for perceptually assigned race, participant ethnicity,
and human-likeness, and random intercepts for participant and
voice. Participant ethnicity included White, Black, Asian,
Hispanic/Latino, and Multiracial American categories. Sepa-
rate models were fit for perceived female- and male-sounding
voices.
Our results show that, for female-sounding voices, percep-
tually assigned race was not a significant predictor of any trait.
Figure 1:Mean ratings across personality traits across as-
signed genders.
For male-sounding voices, voices categorized as Black were
rated as less pleasant (β=−0.64,p < .05), professional
(β=−1.09,p < .05), trustworthy (β=−0.53,p < .05),
and competent (β=−0.67,p < .05) than voices categorized
as White; no differences were observed for friendliness or fun-
niness. Participant ethnicity was not significant in any model.
In addition, we find that perceived human-likeness was a
significant positive predictor for all personality traits across
both perceived genders (p<.01).
3.3. Acoustic Results
For the acoustic analysis, Ambiguous voices were excluded, as
the analysis focused on voices that elicited clear race categoriza-
tions. This filtering resulted in a gender imbalance across per-
ceptually assigned race labels, with substantially fewer Black
Female voices. For this reason, the Gradient Boosted Decision
Tree classifier was trained only on acoustic data from male-
rated voices.
A model including all acoustic features was evaluated us-
ing the CV procedure described in §2.3. To account for vowel-
specific dependencies, vowel identities were one-hot encoded
and included as features in the model. As a negative control,
a feature consisting entirely of zeros was also included. In to-
tal, 61 features were supplied to the model. Average accuracy
across test folds for the model was 65%.
Figure 2 showcases the mean gain values for the top 15
acoustic features used in a model fit to the entire training data.
A reduced model with only these top 15 features was fit us-
ing the same CV procedure. Average accuracy on test folds was
66%, validating these particular features, and indicating that a
reduced feature set generalizes better to our data.
The mean centered/normalized values across normalized
time for the top features CPP, F4, Residual H1*, H2*-H4*, and
H2kHz* - H5kHz* are depicted in Figure 3. Given that these
features are not dependent on vowel quality, mean values are
aggregated across all vowels in the dataset.
What we see is that voices rated as Black have lower values
for CPP, H2* - H4*, and H2kHz * - H5kHz*, as well as higher
values of F4 than voices rated as White. The most robust effect
is seen in Residual H1*, in which speakers rated as Black appear
to have much lower values across the duration of the vowel.
4011
Figure 2:Gain values for acoustic features used in the model fit
to the entire data.
Figure 3:Mean structure across normalized time for the top
features used in the classifier. Shaded ribbons show 95% CI
across mean values.
F1/F2 values across vowels in the dataset appear in Figure
4 In Hertz (Hz). For the purpose of interpretability, the figure
shows raw values. Localized differences in F1 (∼100Hz) are
observed for the vowels/æ/,/E/, and/i/, as well as in both F1
and F2 for/æI/.
4. Discussion
In this study, we find that listeners are capable of categorizing
synthesized voices by race, though we do find a bias towards
rating voices as White, matching previous research [7]. Despite
this, voices that were consistently rated as Black were also rated
as significantly lower in terms of personality ratings. No such
differences were found amongst female voices. One potential
reason for this could be that listeners were less certain about the
race of voices originally labeled as Black Females, thus making
it less likely for them to assign racially-driven stereotypes. We
also find that an increase in perceived human-likeness of the
synthetic voice leads to an increase in all personality ratings, in
Figure 4:Raw F1 and F2 values access time for Black versus
White-rated voices. Shaded ribbons represent 95% CI around
mean values.
line with previous research that suggests that humans are more
likely to anthropomorphize synthetic speech the more human-
like it sounds [10, 11].
With regards to our acoustic results, research on the pho-
netic differences between humans who speak MAE and AAE
in the spectral domain is limited. Regardless, we know that the
features we found related to lower frequency harmonics (Resid-
ual H1* and H2* - H4*) have been found to be correlated with
laryngeal configuration and glottal constriction [26, 19]. The
other features we find (CPP, H2kHz* - H5kHz*, and F4) are
correlated with individual variation between speakers of the
same language [23]. The acoustic differences we find in vowel
quality (F1/F2), however, have been reliably shown to occur
amongst human speakers of MAE and AAE. Overall, our re-
sults show that modern TTS models are capable of encoding
fine-grained acoustic differences found amongst human MAE
and AAE speakers.
Together, these findings have important implications for the
implementation of V oice-AI technology. Our acoustic results
can be leveraged in order to better understand how to encode the
perception of race in synthetic speech. However, the presence
of racial stereotyping in listener judgments warrants caution on
behalf of web-developers when employing synthetic speech in
socially sensitive contexts, so as to avoid perpetuating harmful
racial stereotypes.
5. Conclusion
In this study, we show that listeners are able to get a sense of
race when hearing synthetic speech. Though we do find an over-
all bias towards rating voices as White, we find that voices con-
sistently rated as Black are generally rated as lower in terms
of personality traits. In an exploratory acoustic analysis, we
find that voices with lower Residual H1* and high-frequency
spectral tilt are more regularly rated as Black. Features related
to vowel quality (e.g., F1 and F2) also employ vowel-specific
variation between voices rated as Black versus White, matching
human data. Ultimately, we see that synthetic speech is capable
of encoding acoustic variation humans associate with race in its
signal, though more work can be done to understand not only
how this is done, but also the social consequences related to it.
4012
6. Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the members of the UCSD Pho-
netics Lab for their meaningful feedback on the analysis and
experimental design.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were solely used for code refinement and
for help configuring the typesetting. Generative AI tools were
not used to assist with writing the actual text of the manuscript.