Y our U-Net Dereverberation Model is Secretly an RIR Encoder
Sina Khanagha1, Timo Gerkmann1
1 Signal Processing Group, University of Hamburg, Germany
sina.khanagha@uni-hamburg.de
Abstract
In this work, we analyze the ability of NCSN++ U-Net based
audio dereverberation models to capture global room charac-
teristics in their intermediate representations. Through an em-
pirical study of both a state-of-the-art diffusion-based model
and a discriminative counterpart, we show that deeper lay-
ers encode structured room impulse response (RIR)-dependent
embeddings. Moreover, the discriminative ability of this im-
plicit room representation correlates with dereverberation per-
formance across objective metrics. Motivated by this observa-
tion, we propose a training strategy that explicitly conditions
the network on pre-trained RIR embeddings, obtained via self-
supervised contrastive learning. Incorporating RIR condition-
ing improves representation quality, accelerates convergence,
and enhances dereverberation performance, while significantly
reducing the number of reverse diffusion steps required by the
diffusion-based model during inference.
Index Terms: audio dereverberation, contrastive learning,
knowledge localization, diffusion models
1. Introduction
The reverberation effect originates from reflection of acoustic
waves in closed environments from various surfaces which in
turn degrades the intelligibility and the overall perceived quality
of speech [1]. Therefore, the goal of dereverberation models is
to revert this effect and retrieve the anechoic speech from the
reverberant mixture. More specifically, in this work we will
focus on the single-channel case where the audio samples are
recorded using a single microphone.
Earlier dereverberation methods relied mainly on statistical
assumptions regarding anechoic and reverberant mixture speech
to perform the task [2, 3, 4]. These methods can be further cat-
egorized intoinformed[4] andblind[5, 6] depending on the
availability of the room impulse response (RIR). Prior knowl-
edge of the RIR in informed scenarios simplifies the task but
precise knowledge of the RIR in real-world scenarios is a rel-
atively unrealistic assumption limiting the applicability of in-
formed methods compared to blind counterpart.
Most recent methods utilize deep neural networks (DNNs)
and tackle the problem from a data-driven angle [7, 8, 9, 10].
The typical procedure is to train a DNN on pairs of anechoic
and reverberant speech pairs in a supervised manner. There
are also unsupervised blind methods [11, 12] that typically
show worse performance in matched condition evaluations but
demonstrate superior robustness in mismatched conditions (out-
of-distribution data).
Diffusion-based models have gained significant popularity
in speech enhancement (SE) tasks in recent years [8, 9]. The
general SE problem is typically formulated as an additive pro-
cess, which is well aligned with the denoising principles un-
derlying diffusion-based generative models. Nevertheless, it
has been empirically demonstrated that diffusion models are
also competitive with discriminative baselines in dereverbera-
tion tasks and can even exhibit superior robustness under mis-
matched conditions [11].
A common hypothesis explaining the strong performance
of diffusion models in additive SE is that these methods aim to
learn the conditional probability paths that progressively trans-
form a noisy sample, drawn from different noise level distribu-
tions, into a clean speech sample through multiple refinement
steps [8, 9, 10]. However, reverberation arises from a deter-
ministic convolutional process rather than a random additive
one. Therefore, the same probabilistic interpretation provided
by diffusion-based SE literature does not directly apply. In con-
trast, discriminative models are typically trained to learn a di-
rect, deterministic mapping between a noisy input and its corre-
sponding clean target which is more aligned with the determin-
istic convolutional nature of the reverberation theory. Despite
the growing success of diffusion-based methods for the task,
theoretical or empirical analysis of their probabilistic interpreta-
tion under deterministic reverberation has remained largely un-
explored.
To better understand the behavior of diffusion-based and
discriminative models for dereverberation, we first analyze the
internal representations learned by two state-of-the-art models.
By extracting features from deeper U-Net layers, we show that
both diffusion-based and discriminative approaches learn simi-
lar structured, RIR-dependent representations. This observation
suggests that diffusion-based baselines in fact exhibit hybrid be-
havior, combining generative modeling with implicit determin-
stic RIR encoding. Furthermore, we demonstrate a strong cor-
relation between our diffusion baseline’s ability to cluster indi-
vidual RIRs and its dereverberation performance. Motivated by
this finding, we propose a practical strategy to enhance repre-
sentation learning by conditioning the diffusion-based baseline
on RIR embeddings obtained from a pre-trained contrastive RIR
encoder. We show that this proof-of-concept approach acceler-
ates convergence, improves representation quality, and signifi-
cantly reduces the number of reverse diffusion steps needed to
reach desirable performance.
2. Background
Reverberation in speech is the result of sound reflections from
surfaces in an enclosed environment, which results in tempo-
ral smearing of the original signal. In signal processing theory,
it is commonly modeled as a linear time-invariant convolution
between the clean speechx(t)and the RIRh(t):
y(t) =x(t)∗h(t),(1)
4501
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2707
wherey(t)is the observed reverberant signal. The RIRh(t)
characterizes the environment’s acoustic properties, including
reflection delays, decay rates, and frequency-dependent absorp-
tion. For simulation, reverberation is applied by convolving
clean speech with pre-recorded or synthetic RIRs, enabling con-
trolled evaluation of dereverberation methods.
Even with a known room impulse response (RIR), perfect
dereverberation is a non-trivial task since real RIRs are often
non-minimum phase, making direct inversion unstable [4, 13].
Therefore, DNN-based dereverberation models often aim to di-
rectly undo the effect of the convolved RIR and recover the
clean speech sample instead of RIR approximation.
Discriminative dereveberation models learn a deterministic
mappingf θ(y)from reverberant speechyto clean speechx
via supervised regression [14]. The training objective is often
simply defined as a mean-squared error (MSE):
Ldisc(θ) =E (x,y)∥fθ(y)−x∥ 2
2.(2)
Diffusion-based dereverberation models, in contrast, im-
plicitly learn the conditional distributionp(x|y)of clean
speech given a noisy observation. During training, the model
predicts the Gaussian noise added at each diffusion step [8].
By learning these conditional denoising steps, diffusion mod-
els approximate the full distribution of clean speech and enable
iterative reconstruction.
However, an important design choice in many of the recent
diffusion-based dereverberation models is that the reverberant
speechyitself is also concatenated with the current process
statext as one of the input channels to the U-Net DNN at every
time stept[8, 9, 10]. We argue that availability of the orig-
inal reverberant sample at every step of diffusion process in-
herently results in a hybrid model that combines discriminative
deterministic mapping functions with the conditional generative
properties of diffusion models. We will provide a more in-depth
discussion about this theory in section 5.
3. Method
3.1. RIR Encoder Training
Inspired by recent work in this field [15, 16, 17, 18, 19], we train
the RIR encoder using a contrastive learning framework that en-
courages embeddings from the speech samples corrupted by the
same RIR to be close while pushing embeddings from different
RIRs apart. For each training batch, two speech utterances are
convolved with the same RIR to produce a positive pair. The en-
coder outputs fixed-length embeddings for each convolved sig-
nal, which are then normalized and compared using a cosine
similarity-based InfoNCE loss [20]:
Lpos =− 1
B
BX
i=1
log


P
j∈P(i) exp

z⊤
i zj
τ

P
ℓ̸=i exp
 z⊤
i zℓ
τ


.(3)
whereBis the batch size,z i∈R d denotes theℓ 2-normalized
embedding of samplei,P(i)denotes the set of positive indices
for anchori, andτis a temperature hyperparameter. A sec-
ondary hard negative-pair loss is also included to explicitly en-
courage the model to ignore the speech content of a sample.
Hard negatives are created by convolving the same speech ut-
terance with two different RIRs and trying to minimize the sim-
ilarity between the output embeddings of these two samples:
Lneg = 1
B
BX
i=1
z⊤
i z−
i .(4)
Since the embeddings in both loss terms areℓ 2-normalized, the
loss reduces to cosine similarity in the range of[−1,1]. The to-
tal training objective is a weighted combination of these terms:
Ltotal =L pos +λL neg.(5)
enabling the encoder to learn a rich embedding space that cap-
tures the variability of RIRs while remaining invariant to the
convolved speech content.
3.2. FiLM Conditioning
Both discriminative and diffusion-based models commonly em-
ploy U-Net based architectures. In particular, the NCSN++ U-
Net, originally proposed by [21] for diffusion-based image gen-
eration, has demonstrated strong performance in both SE and
dereverberation tasks. As a result, it has become a popular back-
bone for state-of-the-art SE and dereverberation models. Both
of our baseline models adopt the NCSN++ architecture with the
exact configurations specified by the original authors, resulting
in negligible differences in model size across the baselines.
Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM) [22] is a condi-
tioning mechanism that adapts intermediate network features
using external information. Given an intermediate feature map
F∈R C×T and a conditioning vectorc, a small conditioning
network learns channel-wise scaling and shifting parameters:
γ=f γ(c),β=f β(c),(6)
whereγ,β∈R C. The modulated features are then given by
FiLM(F|c) =γ⊙F+β.(7)
We inject the RIR embedding into each BigGAN-style [23]
residual block of NCSN++ at every resolution using a FiLM-
based modulation applied after the second normalization layer.
The conditioning embedding is first normalized via LayerNorm
and passed through a linear projection to produce channel-wise
scaling and shifting parameters, which are split intoγandβ. To
ensure stable training, the FiLM layer is initialized to behave as
an identity mapping by zero-initializing its weights and biases.
Furthermore, the modulation parameters are bounded byγ=
1 + 0.1 tanh(γraw)andβ= 0.1β raw, limiting the magnitude of
the initial perturbation.
4. Experimental Setup
4.1. Dataset
We use the VCTK corpus [24] as clean speech, selecting 103
speakers for training, two for validation, and two for testing.
The dataset contains approximately 44 hours of audio, which
we downsample to 16 kHz for all experiments. Reverberant
conditions are simulated using around 10K real RIRs collected
from multiple public datasets [11], which we split into training,
validation, and test sets with a 0.9/0.05/0.05 ratio. We refer to
this dataset as VCTK-Reverb.
Naturally, due to the fact that in our VCTK-Reverb test set
each RIR has been used 1 to 3 times, it is difficult to directly
conduct RIR representation analysis on the data. Therefore, in
4502
(a) SGMSE+ | PESQ: 2.62
 (b) SGMSE+ w/ ResNet34 Embeddings | PESQ: 2.86
 (c) SGMSE+ w/ Conformer Embeddings | PESQ: 2.89
(d) NCSN++ | PESQ: 2.77
 (e) ResNet34 RIR Encoder
 (f) Conformer RIR Encoder
RIR ID
rir0 rir1 rir2 rir3 rir4 rir5 rir6 rir7 rir8 rir9
Figure 1:t-SNE visualizations of embeddings extracted from 950 simulated reverberant samples. For the dereverberation models
(a–d), embeddings are taken from the attention block of the NCSN++ backbone. For the proposed RIR encoders (e–f), embeddings are
obtained directly from the encoder outputs. The corresponding dereverberation performance on the VCTK-Reverb test set (Figure 2),
with N=50 for diffusion-based models, is also reported for each model.
order to investigate and visualize the RIR embeddings of our
RIR encoders and attention features of dereverberation base-
lines, we created a secondary dataset. For this dataset, we ran-
domly select 95 clean utterances from the two VCTK test speak-
ers and 10 RIRs from the test set and convolve each RIR with
every utterance, resulting in 950 reverberant samples.
All reported speech quality metrics are computed strictly
on the 774 samples of the VCTK-Reverb test set; the secondary
dataset is used only for embedding visualization.
4.2. Baselines
For our experiments, we selected two dereverberation models:
the diffusion-based SGMSE+ [8] and NCSN++ U-Net as a dis-
criminative baseline, which also serves as the backbone for the
diffusion model. We train SGMSE+ using the official imple-
mentation provided by the authors and adopt all default training
hyperparameters as described in the original work [8], unless
stated otherwise. Note that we use the smaller SGMSE+M and
NCSN++M configurations [9] with 27.8M parameters. For sim-
plicity, we omit the suffix “M” throughout the paper.
Furthermore, we used wide-band PESQ [25] and DNSMOS
[26] as comparison metrics. All models are trained from scratch
until convergence, and for evaluation, we selected the check-
point achieving the highest wide-band PESQ on a smaller sub-
set of validation samples.
Additionally, we train two RIR encoders: a ResNet34-
based encoder [27] and a Conformer-based encoder [28] (10
layers, 256 hidden units, 4 attention heads), both followed
by a two-layer projection head producing 256-dimensionalℓ 2-
normalized embeddings. Both models were trained using the
same modified InfoNCE objective (λ= 0.2andτ= 0.07) with
AdamW (learning rate10−4, weight decay10−2, batch size 16)
for 200 epochs, with the best model selected based on validation
loss. Complete architectural specifications and training hyper-
parameters are available in the accompanying repository1.
5. Results and Discussion
5.1. RIR Representation Analysis
For this analysis, reverberant speech samples are passed through
the model, and embeddings are extracted from the attention
block of NCSN++ via global average pooling over the spatial
dimensions. LetF att∈R C×H×W denote the attention feature
tensor, whereCis the number of channels andHandWare the
spatial dimensions. The corresponding embedding is obtained
via global average pooling:
eatt = 1
HW
HX
h=1
WX
w=1
Fatt(:,h,w),(8)
wheree att ∈R C. Subsequently, we apply the unsupervised
t-SNE [29] clustering algorithm on the extracted embeddings.
The results are illustrated in Figure 1. From the first column of
the figure, we can clearly observe that, regardless of the training
paradigm or loss function, both of our baseline methods learn a
strong global representation of the degradation operator (RIR).
The resulting clusters closely resemble an RIR encoder.
Notably, these clusters begin to emerge in the early layers,
become increasingly stronger toward the bottleneck and atten-
tion blocks of NCSN++, and gradually diminish near the final
layers. However, this behavior is expected since the initial and
1https://github.com/sp-uhh/rir-encoder
4503
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75
3.00PESQ
N=15 N=30 N=50 N=100
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7DNSMOS
Discriminative NCSN++
SGMSE + Conf. Embs.
SGMSE + ResNet Embs.
SGMSE w/o EMA
SGMSE
Figure 2:PESQ and DNSMOS for different models across var-
ious reverse diffusion steps (N).
output representations are closer to the raw STFT domains of
the input and reconstructed speech, where features are more
strongly influenced by speech content than by the underlying
RIR. We chose to visualize the attention block features as we
observed the strongest clusters at these blocks.
Moreover, the plots suggest that diffusion models exhibit a
hybrid behavior. Specifically, they appear to learn determinis-
tic representations associated with individual RIRs, largely in-
dependent of the diffusion timesteptand process statex t. We
argue that since our diffusion baseline explicitly provides the re-
verberant sample as one of the input channels at every time step,
the learned representations exhibit deterministic, degradation-
specific structure, while the sampling process preserves gener-
ative characteristics. At the same time, they generate perceptu-
ally more natural outputs, likely due to the stochastic generative
mechanism of the diffusion process. We hypothesize that this
combination of structured degradation encoding and stochastic
refinement contributes to the adaptability of diffusion models to
the non-additive nature of reverberation problem.
The first row also indicates that there may be a correlation
between the strength of the model in creating well-delimited
clusters and its ability in dereverberation task. We can observe
that the SGMSE+ trained with the exponential moving aver-
age (EMA) of 0.99 has simultaneously the weakest clustering
ability and weakest dereverberation performance of the three
models. In the following section we will further investigate this
theory by trying to enhance the RIR representation learning of
the SGMSE+ model.
5.2. Improving Representation Learning
In this section, we will investigate whether conditioning the
backbone U-Net on pre-trained RIR embeddings can improve
the dereverberation performance of the model. First, (e) and (f)
0 50K 100K 150K 200K 250K 300K 350K 400K
Training Steps
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75PESQ
SGMSE
SGMSE w/o EMA
SGMSE + Conf. Embs.
SGMSE + ResNet Embs.
Figure 3:Validation PESQ over training steps.
plots from Figure 1 verify the fact that our pre-trained RIR en-
coders are able to produce similar contextual representations to
representations learned by the dereverberation models.
Comparing Figure 1(a) with (b) and (c), conditioning
SGMSE+ on pre-trained RIR embeddings leads to more struc-
tured and separable RIR-dependent clusters in the latent space.
As shown in Figure 2, this representation improvement is ac-
companied by consistent PESQ gains of 0.17, 0.24, 0.27, and
0.28 for different numbers of reverse diffusion inference steps
N for the Conformer-conditioned model. A similar trend is
also observable for DNSMOS metric for both of our RIR-
conditioned models. These results support our hypothesis that
strengthening RIR discriminability is associated with improved
dereverberation performance.
We also want to highlight an important detail in training
SGMSE+ with our proposed RIR embeddings which is the fact
that the EMA should be excluded from training for results to
improve. Conversely, setting EMA to zero for the baseline
SGMSE+ has detrimental effects on its convergence (Figure 3)
and the number of required steps to reach desirable performance
(Figure 2). However, with much longer training and twice as
many reverse diffusion steps at inference compared to our RIR-
conditioned models, it does outperform the baseline SGMSE
and demonstrate competitive performance with our proposed
models. The inferior performance of SGMSE+ baseline com-
pared to our models could also be potentially explained by the
dependence of SGMSE+ baseline on EMA for stable training
limiting its learning capabilities. Evidently, our conditioning
method solves this optimization issue and stabilizes the opti-
mization in earlier stages (Figure 3). A summary of the results
is presented in Figure 2.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we investigated the RIR representation learning
capability of diffusion-based and discriminative NCSN++ U-
Net–based dereverberation models by applying unsupervised
clustering to spatially averaged embeddings extracted from
mid-level attention features. Our analysis reveals that these
models implicitly learn strong RIR-dependent representations.
Additionally, we observed a correlation between the discrimi-
native strength of learned representations and dereverberation
performance. Motivated by this observation, we proposed a
conditioning strategy in which the network is trained with pre-
trained RIR embeddings learned via a contrastive framework.
This approach leads to improved RIR representation learning,
faster convergence, and enhanced dereverberation performance.
4504
7. Acknowledgments
Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, Ger-
man Research Foundation) – 545210893, 498394658. The au-
thors gratefully acknowledge the scientific support and HPC re-
sources provided by the Erlangen National High Performance
Computing Center (NHR@FAU) of the Friedrich-Alexander-
Universitat Erlangen-Nurnberg (FAU) under the NHR project
f102ac. NHR funding is provided by federal and Bavarian state
authorities. NHR@FAU hardware is partially funded by the
German Research Foundation (DFG) – 440719683.
8. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used only for minor language editing
(clarity, grammar, and polishing). All ideas, methods, experi-
ments, results, and conclusions were produced and verified by
the authors, who take full responsibility for the paper.
9. References
[1] P. A. Naylor and N. D. Gaubitch, Eds.,Speech Dereverberation.
London: Springer, 2010.
[2] E. A. P. Habets,Speech Dereverberation Using Statistical Rever-
beration Models. London: Springer, 2010, pp. 57–93.
[3] T. Gerkmann and R. Martin, “Empirical distributions of dft-
domain speech coefficients based on estimated speech variances,”
inProc. Int. Workshop Acoust. Echo Noise Control, 2010.
[4] I. Kodrasi, T. Gerkmann, and S. Doclo, “Frequency-domain
single-channel inverse filtering for speech dereverberation: The-
ory and practice,” inIEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, Signal
Proc. (ICASSP), Florence, Italy, 2014.
[5] T. Nakatani, B.-H. Juang, T. Yoshioka, K. Kinoshita, M. Delcroix,
and M. Miyoshi, “Speech dereverberation based on maximum-
likelihood estimation with time-varying gaussian source model,”
IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1512–1527, 2008.
[6] F. Yohena and K. Yatabe, “Single-channel blind dereverberation
based on rank-1 matrix lifting in time-frequency domain,” inIEEE
Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, Signal Proc. (ICASSP), Seoul, Ko-
rea, Republic of, 2024.
[7] D. S. Williamson and D. Wang, “Time-frequency masking in
the complex domain for speech dereverberation and denoising,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Pro-
cessing, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1492–1501, 2017.
[8] J. Richter, S. Welker, J.-M. Lemercier, B. Lay, and T. Gerkmann,
“Speech enhancement and dereverberation with diffusion-based
generative models,”IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing, vol. 31, pp. 2351–2364, 2023.
[9] J.-M. Lemercier, J. Richter, S. Welker, and T. Gerkmann, “Storm:
A diffusion-based stochastic regeneration model for speech en-
hancement and dereverberation,”IEEE/ACM Transactions on Au-
dio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 31, pp. 2724–2737,
2023.
[10] S. Welker, B. Lay, M. Hillemann, T. Peer, and T. Gerkmann,
“Real-time streamable generative speech restoration with flow
matching,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19442, 2025.
[11] J.-M. Lemercier, E. Moliner, S. Welker, V . V¨alim¨aki, and T. Gerk-
mann, “Unsupervised blind joint dereverberation and room acous-
tics estimation with diffusion models,”IEEE Transactions on Au-
dio, Speech and Language Processing, vol. 33, pp. 2244–2258,
2025.
[12] P. Wang and X. Li, “Rvae-em: Generative speech dereverberation
based on recurrent variational auto-encoder and convolutive trans-
fer function,” inIEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, Signal Proc.
(ICASSP), Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2024.
[13] S. T. Neely and J. B. Allen, “Invertibility of a room impulse re-
sponse,”The Journal of the Acoustical Soc