Fast Speech Foundation Model Distillation Using Interleaved Stacking
Eungbeom Kim ID 1, Kyogu Lee ID 1,2,3
1IPAI, 2AIIS, 3Dept. of Intelligence and Information
Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
eb.kim@snu.ac.kr, kglee@snu.ac.kr
Abstract
Distilling a large speech foundation model (SFM) into an ef-
ficient student model has been successfully applied to low-
resource environments. Although distillation reduces inference
latency, it requires an additional student model training. How-
ever, the training efficiency of SFM distillation remains under-
explored. In this work, we explore training acceleration of SFM
distillation to speed up model deployment. We examine the po-
tential of stacking, in which the model depth is progressively in-
creased through training until the target model depth is reached.
While existing stacking methods improve training speed, they
suffer from performance degradation. To handle this limita-
tion, we propose interleaved stacking, a novel stacking method
that consistently preserves layer position throughout the stack-
ing process. This property is particularly critical in SFMs, in
which each layer encodes distinct layer-specific knowledge. We
validate the effectiveness of the proposed method on SUPERB.
Index Terms: speech foundation models, training acceleration,
knowledge distillation
1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation (KD) [1] is one of the most popular ap-
proaches for deploying deep learning models in real-world en-
vironments. By training an efficient student model with low
computational requirements, KD avoids the expensive cost of
large-scale models. In speech processing, KD has demon-
strated strong impact for speech foundation models (SFMs).
For instance, DistilHuBERT [2] reduces the depth of the Trans-
former model [3] to two layers while preserving the width of
the teacher SFM. Likewise, shallow-and-wide student archi-
tectures have been widely adopted for their remarkable effi-
ciency, but suffer from performance degradation on complex
speech processing tasks such as automatic speech recogni-
tion (ASR), phoneme recognition (PR), and slot filling (SF).
As an alternative, [4, 5, 6] mitigate performance degradation
by employing deep-and-narrow architectures for the student
model. While deep-and-narrow architectures achieve compet-
itive performance under memory constraints, [7] observes that
they induce limited speed improvement compared to shallow-
and-wide architectures. Although this is expected given that
shallow-and-wide architectures are more suited to parallel com-
puting, this leads to delayed training of deep-and-narrow stu-
dent models.
To address this issue, we focus on training acceleration via
stacking-based stagewise training, in which the model is pro-
gressively extended through training stages. At the end of each
stage, the model depth is increased for the next stage, and this
process is repeated until the target model depth is reached. By
doing so, the total training cost is reduced because early stages
only train low-cost shallow architectures. However, since there
is a mismatch between the target model and the early stage mod-
els, stacking can lead to performance degradation of the target
model. In this context, various stacking strategies have been
explored to prevent performance degradation, as shown in Fig-
ure 1. For instance, gradual stacking [8] copies the lastKlayers
and stacks them on top of the model at the end of each stage,
successfully boosting training speed while maintaining com-
petitive downstream performance on language modeling tasks.
Instead of selecting the lastKlayers, MIDAS [9] utilizes the
middle layers and shows that stacking can even surpass conven-
tional models on language-based reasoning tasks under a well-
defined stacking strategy.
Despite the potential of stacking for training acceleration,
stacking for SFM distillation remains uninvestigated. There-
fore, our primary goal in this work is to examine the effective-
ness of stacking approaches for SFM distillation and to design
a stacking approach that reduces training costs without sacri-
ficing the performance of the model. In particular, we focus
on the inconsistent layer positions across training stages in ex-
isting stacking approaches. For instance, in gradual stacking,
the late layers are relocated to earlier positions across train-
ing stages, because the copied layers are repeatedly stacked on
top of the model. Since the SFMs are known to exhibit layer-
specific knowledge [10, 11, 12], we argue that this inconsis-
tency is undesirable for SFM distillation. Instead, we introduce
interleaved stacking, in which each copied layer is inserted right
after its original layer, as shown in Figure 1. By doing so, the
early and late layers in the initial stage remain at the proportion-
ally early and late positions, respectively, in subsequent stages.
This is further inspired by the prior studies [13, 14] confirm-
ing that adjacent Transformer layers behave similarly, which
also holds for SFMs [15]. Furthermore, due to this advantage,
intermediate-level KD losses are naturally integrated into the
proposed method, which is critical for SFM distillation [2, 5].
We evaluate our training acceleration method for SFM dis-
tillation on various speech processing downstream tasks using
the SUPERB benchmark [16]. First, we verify the effective-
ness of existing stacking approaches for training acceleration in
terms of reduced training cost requirements, although there is
performance degradation on downstream tasks. Building upon
this, we demonstrate that the proposed method successfully mit-
igates performance degradation of the existing stacking base-
lines across content, semantics, and speaker-based speech pro-
cessing tasks under multiple scheduling strategies. Further-
more, we verify the seamless compatibility of the proposed
stacking method with the intermediate-level KD losses, achiev-
ing extra performance gains.
6426
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3071
Figure 1:Illustration of various stacking approaches: (a) grad-
ual stacking, (b) MIDAS, and (c) interleaved stacking (ours).
Figure 2:Illustration of the proposed training framework with
interleaved stacking. The total loss function consists of the
output-level KD loss and the intermediate-level KD loss.
2. Background
Knowledge distillation trains a smallN-layer student model
f=f N◦···◦f 1 =f N:1 using the knowledge of a largeM-
layer teacher model for model compression. Here, our goal is to
accelerate student model training via stagewise training using a
stacking approach. We considerB-stage training for stacking.
At the initial stage, a shallowK-layer model is initialized where
K=N/B, and at the end of the training stage,Klayers are
copied and appended to the previous model for the next stage.
For instance, after theK-layer model is initialized and trained
in the initial stage, a2K-layer model is initialized based on the
previous stage model and then trained in the second stage. This
is repeated until theB-th stage, where the model reaches to the
target depthN. That is, theb-th stage model hasbKlayers,
and the finalB-th stage model has the fullBK=Nlayers.
Since shallow models are trained in the early stages, the overall
training cost is reduced by the stagewise training approach.
For stagewise training, several stacking approaches have
been investigated in the prior studies.Gradual stacking[8]
is a popular stacking baseline in which the lastKlayers are
copied and stacked on top of the model. That is, the(b+ 1)-th
stage model is initialized byf bK:(b−1)K+1◦f bK:(b−1)K+1◦
f(b−1)K:1, wheref bK:1 is theb-th stage model.MIDAS[9]
selects an intermediate block ofKlayers for stacking; thus,
the(b+ 1)-th stage model is initialized byf bK:iK+1 ◦
fiK:(i−1)K+1◦f iK:(i−1)K+1◦f (i−1)K:1, wherei=⌈b/2⌉
denotes the intermediate block. In this work, we explore the
effectiveness of stacking for fast SFM distillation for the first
time, to the best of our knowledge.
3. Interleaved Stacking
While stacking reduces training cost, we find that it negatively
impacts downstream performance. Thus, we propose a novel
stacking method,interleaved stacking, for SFM distillation.
Instead of copying and stacking the consecutiveKlayers in the
model as in the existing approaches, in theb-th stage we select
everyb-th layer to copyKlayers in total and insert each copied
layer after its original layer. That is, the(b+ 1)-th stage model
is initialized by copying and stacking the layerfbk from theb-th
stage model, asf bk =f bk◦f bk fork= 1, . . . , K, which is
also depicted in Figure 1 (c).
By doing so, we preserve layer position consistency, in con-
trast to existing methods such as gradual stacking, where the last
layer of the initial stage model is repositioned to the middle of
the model at the next stage. This is critical for SFM distillation
in that such positional inconsistency hinders the distillation of
layer-specific knowledge in SFMs [10, 11, 12]. Moreover, this
layer position consistency of the proposed method makes the
distillation naturally compatible with the intermediate-level KD
losses, which are a key component of SFM distillation [2, 5, 4].
Additionally, by locating each copied layer at the subsequent
position of its original layer, the copied layers are placed in sim-
ilar position to their original layers, which is motivated by the
prior studies [13, 15, 14] that empirically confirm the similarity
between adjacent layers.
Next, we combine the proposed stacking approach with
SFM distillation. We consider a frame-level MSE loss function
between the teacher SFM outputy T ∈R F×D T
and the stu-
dent SFM outputy∈R F×D to train the student model follow-
ing [17, 5, 6], whereFdenotes the total number of frames, and
DT andDdenotes the teacher and student output dimensions,
respectively. To project theD-dimensional student representa-
tion to the teacher dimensionDT , we utilize a simple linear pro-
jection layer proj(·). The output-level KD loss functionLis for-
mulated as follows:L=MSE(y T ,proj(y)). We also adopt the
intermediate-level KD loss using the layer-to-layer MSE loss
inspired by [18, 5, 4]. However, the student model has reduced
depth in stacking approaches except the last stage. Thus, we set
the(K−1)intermediate-level KD losses for theK-layer ini-
tial stage student model and maintain these throughout training.
For the target representations, everyM/K-th teacher interme-
diate representation is utilized except the final output as follows:
Linter = PK−1
k=1 MSE(yT
kM/K ,proj k(ybk)), wherey T
i andy i
denote thei-th layer representations of the teacher model and
the student model, respectively, and proj i(·)is thei-th projec-
tion layer. Note that the target layer indices of the teacher model
for the intermediate-level KD loss are fixed across all stages to
ensure stable and fast training. For instance, given a 12-layer
teacher and student models,B= 4training stages, and a3-
layer initial stage model (K=N/B= 3), the intermediate-
level KD loss is set toL inter =MSE(y T
4 , y1) +MSE(y T
8 , y2)
forb= 1andL inter =MSE(y T
4 , y2) +MSE(y T
8 , y4)for
b= 2. Finally, the total loss function is defined asL total =
L+wL inter, where the hyperparameterwcontrols the weight
of the intermediate-level KD loss function. The overall training
process is simply illustrated in Figure 2.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
For all experiments, the HuBERT base model [20] with 94.68M
parameters is considered for the teacher model. For the stu-
dent model, we consider the 12-layer Transformer model with
an output dimension of 384, a feed-forward dimension of 1536,
and 8 attention heads, resulting in 26.87M parameters. The stu-
dent model is optimized with AdamW [21] using a learning rate
of5×10 −4, a batch size of 64, and a weight decay of1×10 −4
for 75 epochs on the 960-hour LibriSpeech dataset [22]. A lin-
6427
Table 1:Results of the SFM distillation approaches on SUPERB PR, ASR, SF , and SID tasks. HuBERT is adopted for the teacher model
in common, and the two backbone models (Full and Full L2L) trained without stacking is evaluated for experiments. For scheduling of
stagewise training, equal scheduling and prop-1 scheduling are utilized for experiments. The best result of each scheduling strategy is
in boldface, and the proposed method demonstrates significant performance improvement across all tasks.
PR ASR SF SID
Model Schedule Speed #Params PER↓WER↓F1↑CER↓Acc↑
HuBERT - - 94.68M 5.41 6.42 88.53 25.20 81.42
DistilHuBERT [2] - - 23.49M 16.27 13.37 82.57 35.59 73.54
12-L HALF [4] - - 26.87M 13.09 11.87 84.49 32.54 69.11
12-L HALF L2L [4] - - 26.87M 10.67 10.96 86.11 30.93 69.52
ARMHuBERT [6] - - 26.45M 7.72 9.96 87.59 26.06 65.03
DPHuBERT [19] - - 23.59M 9.67 10.47 86.86 28.26 76.83
Full -×1.0526.87M 10.22 10.33 83.42 31.62 73.83
Full L2L -×1.0026.87M 9.12 9.92 86.47 28.58 72.99
GradStack EQL×1.2526.87M 11.50 11.04 84.34 31.15 70.89
MIDAS EQL×1.2526.87M 10.75 10.74 83.43 32.22 69.94
InterleaveStack (ours) EQL×1.2426.87M9.08 10.22 86.36 27.50 72.26
GradStack PROP-1×1.1726.87M 10.39 10.65 84.35 31.50 70.65
MIDAS PROP-1×1.1726.87M 10.35 10.72 84.37 30.56 72.04
InterleaveStack (ours) PROP-1×1.1626.87M8.88 9.99 85.70 28.45 73.60
(a)ASR
 (b)SF
 (c)SID
Figure 3:Effect of the intermediate-level KD loss weightw∈
{0.0,0.1,0.3,0.5}on interleaved stacking for SFM distilla-
tion. The evaluation is conducted on three tasks, ASR, SF , and
SID, using the SUPERB benchmark.
ear learning rate decay schedule is applied with warmup over
the initial 7% of training steps. The trained models are evalu-
ated on phoneme recognition (PR), automatic speech recogni-
tion (ASR), slot filling (SF), and speaker identification (SID) us-
ing the speech processing benchmark, SUPERB [16]. The mod-
els are frozen during downstream task training, and we follow
the standard SUPERB configuration while adopting a learning
rate of5×10 −5 for SID, following prior studies [19, 23, 24].
For stacking approaches, stagewise training is conduced
withB= 4stages. Since the student model has 12 layers,
K=N/B= 3layers are extended at each stage. We experi-
ment with two scheduling strategies including the equal strategy
(eql), where training steps are evenly divided across all stages,
and the prop-1 strategy (prop), where training steps are divided
proportionally by stage index. we measure speedup based on
wall-clock time following the prior studies [8, 9].
4.2. Main Results
Table 1 presents the main results of our experiments. To in-
vestigate the effect of stacking, we train the backbone model
without stacking using the output-level KD loss (Full) and the
output-level KD loss with the intermediate-level KD loss (Full
Table 2:Comparison with and without the prediction style
intermediate-level KD loss on gradual stacking.
ASR SF SID
Model WER↓F1↑CER↓Acc↑
GradStack10.65 84.35 31.5070.65
+ pred-sty 10.85 82.72 33.0571.34
L2L), following the layer-to-layer (L2L) distillation loss in [4].
Overall, the proposed method demonstrates its efficiency across
various tasks, successfully reducing required training time. Our
method outperforms the existing stacking baselines under both
scheduling strategies by a large margin on all tasks, PR, ASR,
SF, and SID. For instance, interleaved stacking with the equal
scheduling strategy achieves 9.08 PER on PR, surpassing grad-
ual stacking achieving 11.50 PER and MIDAS achieving 10.75
PER. As expected, the prop-1 scheduling strategy with×1.16
speedup yields superior performance compared to the equal
scheduling strategy with×1.24speedup except on SF.
Since our goal is to accelerate distillation while mitigating
performance degradation relative to the full training framework,
we also compare our method against the model trained with-
out stacking. Surprisingly, although the proposed method with
prop-1 scheduling is trained under the reduced training cost
constraint, it surpasses the full training model in terms of PER
on PR, CER on SF, and accuracy on SID, with only marginal
degradation such as 0.07% increase in WER on ASR, verify-
ing the effectiveness of the proposed method. Furthermore, un-
der the equal scheduling strategy, interleaved stacking outper-
forms the Full model trained without stacking on three out of
four tasks and is competitive to the Full L2L model despite a
reduced training cost.
6428
(a)Full L2L
 (b)Interleaved Stacking
Figure 4:Cross-layer similarity of the distilled SFMs trained
with (a) the conventional full training framework without stack-
ing (Full L2L) and (b) interleaved stacking.
4.3. Intermediate-Level KD Loss
4.3.1. On Interleaved Stacking
We investigate the importance of the intermediate-level KD
lossL inter by adjusting the loss weightw∈{0.1,0.3,0.5}.
As shown in Figure 3, we observe that the proposed method
consistently outperforms the existing methods across allw∈
{0.1,0.3,0.5}on SF, ASR, and SID with the prop-1 schedul-
ing strategy. We setw= 0.5for our method as a default setup
because it achieves the best average results on SUPERB dev
sets.
Although one of the strengths of the proposed method lies
in its compatibility with the intermediate-level KD loss due to
consistent layer positions, we also evaluate the case ofw= 0,
which denotes that the model is trained solely on the output-
level lossLwithout the intermediate-level KD lossL inter. We
find that incorporating the intermediate-level KD loss boosts
performance improvement by a substantial margin, which is
consistent with prior studies confirming the importance of the
intermediate-level supervision in KD. Nevertheless, it is ob-
served that the proposed method outperforms the existing stack-
ing baselines on ASR and SID even without the intermediate-
level KD loss, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed
method. To further investigate this, we also analyze the effect
of the intermediate-level KD loss on gradual stacking.
4.3.2. On Gradual Stacking
Unlike the proposed method, interleaved stacking, gradual
stacking struggles to incorporate the intermediate-level KD
loss. In gradual stacking, the lastKlayers are copied and
stacked on top of the current stage model, resulting in incon-
sistent layer positions across training stages. For instance, late
layers from the early stages are easily repositioned to the mid-
dle or early positions as training proceeds. For this reason, ap-
plying the layer-to-layer matching loss between the teacher and
student intermediate outputs causes training instability, and we
observe the loss diverges easily. As an alternative, we adopt
a prediction-style intermediate-level KD loss similar to Distil-
HuBER [2], in which the final student output is used to predict
multiple intermediate layer outputs of the teacher model. Ta-
ble 2 shows the results of the prediction-style intermediate-level
KD loss applied to gradual stacking with the prop-1 schedul-
ing strategy. Although the prediction style intermediate-level
KD loss improves accuracy on SID, it is not effective for grad-
ual stacking overall, deteriorating performance on ASR and SF.
That is, gradual stacking is incompatible with the intermediate-
level KD loss, whereas interleaved stacking successfully lever-
age it due to consistent layer positions across stages.
4.4. Layer Similarity Analysis
We conduct an analysis of cross-layer similarity in the dis-
tilled SFMs. Normalized cosine similarity is used to measure
cross-layer similarity on the LibriSpeech dev-other dataset, and
Figure 4 shows the results for the distilled models trained (a)
without stacking and (b) with interleaved stacking using equal
scheduling. In the full training setting (Full L2L), we observe
that the adjacent layers exhibit higher correlation than distant
layers, which supports our design choice locating the copied
layers at adjacent positions. Furthermore, the early layers be-
fore the 5-th layer and the late layers after the 5-th layer seems
to respectively exhibit high similarity. This aligns with the ef-
fectiveness of selecting layers at a regular interval for stacking,
by which copying the similar layers are avoided, and layers with
diverse knowledge are uniformly selected.
The proposed model exhibits finer block-like layer simi-
larity structures compared to the conventionally trained model,
suggesting that the role of each layer is more clearly separated.
Specifically, we observe that copied layers and their original
layers, i.e., the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd layers or the 5th, 6th, and 7th
layers retain high similarity after training, indicating that the
copied layers serve similar roles, although the 4th layer and the
8th layer show slightly different patterns due to the position of
the intermediate-level KD loss.
5. Related Work
[4] analyzes a student architecture for SFM distillation by com-
paring a shallow-and-wide architecture similar to [2] and a
deep-and-narrow architecture. In addition, [6] improves ar-
chitectural efficiency of the student model utilizing parameter
reusing. Furthermore, various loss functions for SFM distil-
lation have been investigated, including the combined L1 and
cosine similarity loss, MSE loss, and self-supervised learning-
based loss [2, 5, 24]. Similarly, [2, 5, 4] demonstrate the impor-
tance of appropriate intermediate-level KD losses. Likewise,
knowledge distillation [1] has widely been studied for SFM
compression supported by its effectiveness. However, the train-
ing efficiency of SFM distillation has not been systematically
studied, although training cost is also an essential factor in real-
world deployment. To address this issue, this work focuses on
stagewise training via stacking, exploring various stacking ap-
proaches for SFM distillation.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we study a training acceleration approach based
on stacking for speech foundation model (SFM) distillation,
which has been underexplored despite its practical importance.
We advance the understanding of stacking-based training ac-
celeration for SFM distillation and introduce a novel stacking
method, interleaved stacking. Unlike existing approaches, the
copied layers are inserted adjacent to their original layers while
stacking, resulting in consistent layer positions across multiple
training stages. Consequently, layer-specific knowledge is pre-
served throughout training, and the intermediate-level KD loss
is easily incorporated with the proposed method. We experi-
mentally verify the effectiveness of the proposed method under
multiple scheduling strategies on SUPERB, demonstrating that
the proposed method outperforms existing baselines by a large
margin.
6429
7. Acknowledgments
This work was partly supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea gov-
ernment(MSIT) [No.RS-2025-24683892, 50%] and Institute of
Information & communications Technology Planning & Eval-
uation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT)
[No.RS-2022-II220320, Artificial intelligence research about
cross-modal dialogue modeling for one-on-one multi-modal in-
teractions, 45%] and [No.RS-2021-II211343, Artificial Intelli-
gence Graduate School Program (Seoul National University),
5%]. The GPUs were partly supported by the National IT In-
dustry Promotion Agency (NIPA)’s high-performance comput-
ing support program in 2025.
8. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used only for language polishing and
grammar correction.
9. References
[1] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y . W. Teh, “A fast learning al-
gorithm for deep belief nets,”Neural Computation, vol. 18, pp.
1527–1554, 2006.
[2] H.-J. Chang, S.-w. Yang, and H.-y. Lee, “Distilhubert: Speech
representation learning by layer-wise distillation of hidden-unit
bert,” inICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2022,
pp. 7087–7091.
[3] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, an