Perceptual compensation for tonal context in self-supervised speech models
James Kirby ID 1, Ioana Krehan1, Michele Gubian1
1 Institute for Phonetics and Speech Processing, LMU Munich, Germany
jkirby@phonetik.uni-muenchen.de,Ioana.Krehan@campus.lmu.de,m.gubian@phonetik.uni-muenchen.de
Abstract
This study examines the extent to which the wav2vec2.0 ar-
chitecture exhibits evidence of compensation for phonologi-
cal context. We conducted a pseudo-replication of a percep-
tional compensation experiment on Mandarin Chinese tones,
and compared the embedding similarities and probing classifier
outputs between a purely self-supervised pre-trained model and
a model fine-tuned for Mandarin ASR. No evidence of com-
pensation was found in the embedding similarities of the purely
pre-trained model. Probing classifiers showed some evidence of
compensation in addition to the expected layer-wise improve-
ments in categorization, but failed to replicate human perfor-
mance on isolated test syllables. Our findings contrast with pre-
vious reports of sensitivity to phonological structure emerging
through pre-training alone, and suggest that supervised objec-
tives may be necessary to encourage the abstraction of at least
some types of phonological regularities.
Index Terms: speech perception, self-supervised learning, lex-
ical tone, Mandarin Chinese
1. Introduction
This paper aims to contribute to our understanding of the role
of phonological context in speech perception through computa-
tional modeling. We do so by exploring how one neural speech
architecture, wav2vec2.0 [1], represents lexical tones in differ-
ent phonological contexts. By treating wav2vec2.0 as a compu-
tational model of perceptual inference and comparing its behav-
ior to that of human listeners, we gain insight into the extent to
which these types of models encode phonological structure and
what kind of information they use to do so.
Perceptual compensation(PC) refers to the phenomenon
of context-dependent variation in phonetic category perception,
whereby listeners assign acoustically identical speech signals
to different categories depending on the phonetic or phonologi-
cal context [2]. For example, a following rounded vowel biases
fricative perception towards /s/ and away from /S/, despite the
fact that the anticipatory lip rounding makes the fricative acous-
tically more similar to /S/ [3, 4]. Such context effects have been
documented for many speech sounds, in infants [5], and even
in nonhuman animals [6], leading to a debate regarding the ex-
tent to which the effect can be explained by low-level phonetic
mechanisms alone [7, 8].
Modern neural speech recognition systems are often based
on models which have been pre-trained using self-supervised
learning (SSL). In this framework, models are first pre-trained
using a pretext task based on audio only, and then fine-tuned for
specific tasks using supervised learning [9]. The success of the
SSL paradigm has spurred much interest in understanding the
kinds of linguistic information implicitly encoded in the repre-
sentations learned by this class of models [10, 11, 12, 13, 14],
as well as how model behavior compares with that of humans
[15, 16, 17, 18]. For example, [15] show how a supervised
ASR model adapts phoneme category boundaries in response
to ambiguous training examples in a manner similar to that of
humans, while [17] show that a wav2vec2.0 model fine-tuned
for English ASR compensates for assimilation more often in
phonotactically viable contexts than in non-viable ones. These
findings can be interpreted as evidence that neural speech mod-
els have acquired knowledge of how speech sounds are realized
in different phonological contexts, at least when they have been
fine-tuned for tasks involving explicit linguistic categories.
Arguably more surprising are claims that purely pre-trained
models also display such behavior. Like [17], [18] investigated
how wav2vec2.0 encodes ambiguous speech sounds in phono-
tactically viable and non-viable contexts. They observed an ef-
fect of context in both pre-trained and fine-tuned models, lead-
ing them to suggest that the model can implicitly learn English
phonotactic structure even without a symbolic training objec-
tive. Such findings are striking, because they suggest that the
context encoder networks of SSL models may be implicitly cap-
turing information about phonological context without being
given any explicit information about phonological categories.
This would be consistent with accounts of PC that are based on
purely phonetic knowledge [19, 20].
In this paper, we contribute to this line of research by testing
the extent to which a neural speech architecture compensates
for context in the domain of lexical tone, through a pseudo-
replication of a psycholinguistic study of PC in Mandarin Chi-
nese [21]. We hypothesize that the contextualized speech em-
beddings learned with self-supervision may be especially adept
at compensating for suprasegmental contexts such as tone. We
focus here on the wav2vec2.0 architecture, as it has been widely
used in previous related work and because both pre-trained (PT)
and fine-tuned (FT) checkpoints exist for Mandarin Chinese.
We analyze how the model encodes semi-controlled psycholin-
guistic stimuli through the use of probing classifiers and the
study of embedding similarities.
We find that while the embedding similarities of the FT
model show some evidence of PC in later network layers, those
of the PT model show no evidence of compensation for tonal
context at any layer. Probing classifiers tested using both PT
and FT embeddings show some indications of PC, but the clas-
sification of isolated syllables encoded without context diverges
sharply from that of human listeners. Our results therefore sug-
gest caution before concluding that self-supervised pre-training
objectives are sufficient for neural speech models to integrate
information about phonological category representations; su-
pervised learning may still be necessary to encourage the in-
tegration of at least some types of phonological context.
1524
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2409
Figure 1:Left:F0contours of the four lexical tones of
Mandarin Chinese on sonorant syllables extracted from the
AISHELL-3 corpus [23]. Right: realization of Tone 3 in the
context of preceding tones.
2. Background
Most lexical syllables in Mandarin Chinese bear one of four
tones: high-level Tone 1 ([ba1]八‘eight’), high-rising Tone
2 ([ba2]拔‘to pull’), low-falling(-rising) Tone 3 ([ba3]把‘to
take’) or high-falling Tone 4 ([ba4]爸‘father’). Like segments,
the phonetic realization of tones is heavily influenced by car-
ryover coarticulation. For example, although Mandarin T3 is
typically realized with a low-falling contour in post-pausal po-
sition (Fig. 1, left), when preceded by a tone that ends high,
like T1, it is realized with a high-falling contour (Fig. 1, right)
[22]. In other words, when following a T1 or T2, the onset of
T3 is raised, increasing its acoustic similarity to canonical T4;
similarly, in the context of a preceding T4, the onset of T4 is
lowered, increasing its acoustic similarity to canonical T3.
In perception, however, human listeners compensate for
these coarticulatory effects [21, 22, 24, 25]. [21] demonstrated
the effect of preceding tonal context on the perceptual boundary
between low-falling T3 and high-falling T4 by having partici-
pants classify stimuli drawn from a 14-step T4-T3 continuum
using a two-alternative forced choice paradigm. Each trial con-
sisted of atargetstimulus either in isolation, or preceded by
one of the threecontextsyllables. Results (Fig. 2) showed a
clear preference for T3 responses when the preceding tone was
high-offset T1 or T2, and T4 when the preceding tone was low-
offset T4. Importantly, stimuli presented in isolation (labeled
‘no-ctx’ in Fig. 2) were intermediate, suggesting that the tonal
context serves to bias a general phonological representation.
3. Methods
3.1. Stimuli
To investigate whether wav2vec2.0 displays a similar bias in
its responses, we generated continua of Mandarin syllables
with fixed segmental material butF0contours varying between
canonical T3 and T4 endpoints. Typical for psycholinguistic
studies, [21] tested a small number of stimuli on a large number
of participants. Since model responses to individual stimuli will
be deterministic, we introduced variability by resynthesizing a
large number of tonal continua with different preceding tone
contexts by extracting disyllable sequences from forty speak-
ers from thetestsplit of the AISHELL-3 corpus [23], using the
Montreal Forced Aligner [26] to determine syllable boundaries.
As in [21],contextsyllables bore one of T1, T2 or T4, while
targetsyllables bore either T3 or T4. To exclude creaky sam-
ples, we analyzed theF0of potential target audio clips and se-
Figure 2:Proportion of T4 responses from human listeners in
Experiment 3 of [21].
lected only those where at least 10F0samples were present and
above the 10% quantile ofF0for the corresponding speaker.
We then usedParselmouth[27, 28] to apply the duration and
F0manipulations described in [21] to each context-target di-
syllable to obtain a 14-step T4-T3 target continuum preceded
by either a context syllable (with T1, T2, or T4) or in isola-
tion (labeled asno-context). Speaker-dependent 10% and 90%
quantiles were used to determineF0extrema for the continuum
endpoints. This procedure generated around 13,700 continua
(ca. 192,000 stimuli).
3.2. Model checkpoints
All stimuli were then processed by two wav2vec2.0 model
checkpoints: one pre-trained on 1,000 hours of untranscribed
Mandarin speech only1, and one fine-tuned for the task of Man-
darin ASR using 178 hours of transcribed speech2. Both models
contain 7-layer CNN feature encoders followed by 12 Trans-
former layers. We used the Transformers library [29] to down-
load and process both checkpoints.
3.3. Analysis methods
We report results of two methods for analyzing SSL model
representations: embedding similarities and probing classifiers.
We applied both methods to the 512-dimensional output of the
convolutional feature extractor (layer 0) as well as to the 768-
dimensional outputs of the Transformer (layers 1-12).
3.3.1. Embedding similarities
We inspected the internal representations of both models by
comparing the embedding similarities of each stimulus step
with the corresponding T3 and T4 endpoints (cf. [18]). For
a given stimulusX, the corresponding manipulated step-1 (T4)
and step-14 (T3) endpoints based on the same source syllable
were used as reference stimuli. For each stimulus, vectors were
derived by averaging layer-wise embeddings over the entire syl-
lable. Following [18], we then computed the similarity ofXto
T4 relative to T3 as:
sim(X,T4) = 1− Dcos(X,T4)
Dcos(X,T4)+D cos(X,T3) ,(1)
whereD cos(a, b) = 1−cos(a, b). Similarities were modeled as
a continuous, [0,1] bounded beta-distributed response variable
1https://github.com/kehanlu/mandarin-wav2vec2
2https://huggingface.co/kehanlu/
mandarin-wav2vec2-aishell1
1525
Figure 3:T4 embedding similarities(1)as function of T4-T3 continuum step; line thickness indicates 95% confidence bands.
in a generalized additive mixed model (GAMM) using themgcv
R library [30]. Four smooth functions ofstepmodel the effect of
context(T1, T2, T4 orno-ctx), wherestepranges between 2 and
13 (extremes are excluded as they coincide with the references
1=T4 and 14=T3). Speaker-by-context random smooth terms
were added to control for speaker variability. One GAMM was
fit independently for each checkpoint and layer.
3.3.2. Probing classifiers
We trained probing classifiers to predict T3/T4 tone labels from
the representations extracted from each model checkpoint and
layer, following [31]. As for the similarity computation, vectors
were obtained by averaging embeddings over target syllables.
Probing classifiers were linear, fully connected neural net-
works implementing binary logistic regression with cross-
entropy loss, using the Adam optimizer with learning rate10−3.
Classifiers were trained on sets of T3 and T4 syllables from
forty speakers from thetrainsplit of the AISHELL-3 corpus.
We trained on 100 T3 and 100 T4 syllables for each of 36 speak-
ers (18 female) and validated on 4 speakers (2 female). Training
was run for five epochs. Validation accuracy saturated between
82% in the CNN layers and up to 99% in the higher Transformer
layers. Errors were moderately imbalanced in favor of false T3
recognition, the most extreme being layer 12, where 4-6 times
more false T3s than false T4s were predicted.
Testing was carried out on the classifier state after the last
training epoch. The test set consisted of the manipulated stimuli
described in Sec. 3.1. Binary results are modeled as a Bernoulli-
distributed response variable in GAMMs with the same predic-
tor structure described in Sec. 3.3.1 (step extremes included).
4. Results
Here we only show the results for layer 0 (CNN output) and
layers 4, 8, and 12; results for other layers follow similar trends.
4.1. Embedding similarities
Embedding similarities for both PT and FT checkpoints are
shown in Fig. 3. There is no evidence of sensitivity to context
in the PT embeddings (top row). There appears to be a small
effect of the addition of context (compared to the no-context
condition), but not of compensation in the sense seen in [21].
The embedding similarities from the FT model (bottom row),
on the other hand, do show some evidence of context sensitiv-
ity: ambiguous stimuli in a T1 context have contextual repre-
sentations that are more similar to T3 than to T4, indicating that
fine-tuning fundamentally alters the model’s internal represen-
tations. However, these shifts are quite small compared to the
human responses, and again do not seem to be relative to the no-
context embeddings. In addition, the contexts T2 and T4 appear
to pattern together relative to T1, with T1 showing the greatest
shift, which is again a qualitatively different pattern compared
to [21] (Fig. 2).
4.2. Probing classifiers
Fig. 4 shows the proportion of T4 responses at each continuum
step for PT and FT models at four layers. A mild effect of con-
text is visible at the final CNN layers, but already in the fourth
Transformer layers we see an enhanced sensitivity to the con-
tinuum endpoints together with sensitivity to context. This is
strongest in layer 8 of the FT model (bottom row, third panel)
where the response patterns most qualitatively resemble those
of human participants (Fig. 2).
However, in the no-context condition, the expected sig-
moidal response curve fails to emerge in either model at any
layer. This is most visible in the probes tested on FT embed-
dings, where we observe a strong bias for T4 responses regard-
less of theF0contour of the stimulus.
5. Discussion
This study explored the extent to which two wav2vec2.0 mod-
els, one pre-trained and one fine-tuned, exhibited evidence of
compensation for phonological context. Purely self-supervised
representations showed no evidence of the baseline-centered
boundary shifts that characterized perceptual compensation for
tonal coarticulation in [21]. While some evidence of compen-
sation was seen in the later layers of the fine-tuned model, fine-
tuning induced only weak, qualitatively non-human-like shifts
1526
Figure 4:Proportion of T4 responses of probes as function of T4-T3 continuum step; line thickness indicates 95% confidence bands.
that are not clearly anchored to the no-context baseline.
The lack of evidence for PC in the purely self-supervised
model was inconsistent with our hypothesis that Transformer-
based embeddings would have an advantage at inducing con-
textually specific tonal representations, as well as with previ-
ous reports of phonological encoding emerging in purely self-
supervised models [13, 14, 18, 32, 33]. Indeed, our most robust
finding is the complete lack of context sensitivity in purely pre-
trained embeddings (Fig. 3, top).
To what should we attribute these differences? One pos-
sibility is that the acoustic realizations of the segmental [r/l]
contrast studied by both [15] and [18] are overall less variable
across speakers and contexts than lexical tones, which are real-
ized primarily through modulation ofF0, a trajectory subject
to perturbation via baseline shifts, range scaling, truncation, in-
tonational trends, and local segmental perturbations. In other
words, the set of acoustic dimensions that strongly affect the
acoustic signal for tone may be much larger than for something
like the [r/l] contrast, becauseF0is jointly determined by a
large number of extraneous factors. From the model’s perspec-
tive, the influence of the preceding tonal context is competing
with many other plausible explanations to account for the ob-
servedF0trajectory.
Both the embeddings of the FT model, as well as the lin-
ear probes fit to the embeddings of both models, showed some
evidence of PC. We attribute this to the fact that both the fine-
tuning objective and the probing classifiers involving super-
vised training, where the model or classifier is explicitly told
of the existence of lexical tone categories. However, while the
probing results showed the expected increase in accessibility of
tone categories across layers, the responses to isolated sylla-
bles still diverged sharply from that of human listeners. This
finding highlights a potentially important difference between
human and machine processing of phonological context: the
representations learned by even fine-tuned models seem to rely
on broader contextual conditioning, rather than supporting a
context-invariant tonal category biased by local context.
However, we must acknowledge some limitations of our
probing results. Our probes were trained on instances of T3 and
T4 extracted from embeddings made from whole utterances, en-
coding rich contextual information, whereas they were tested
on embeddings made from isolated syllables. Specifically for
the task of single-syllable prediction, the utterance-level con-
text encoded by the FT model may actually be detrimental for
the specific task of syllable-level tone identification [34, 35].
While we were careful to insure our probes did not encode a fre-
quency bias (Sec. 3.3.2), we nonetheless observed a strong bias
for T4 when classifying isolated syllables using the FT model.
We have no explanation for this at present, but speculate that
this may reflect the fact that T4 is the most frequent tone in
Mandarin speech [36]. Moreover, for many speakers, a canon-
ical pre-pausal T3 will be realized with a final rise, which was
never present in our stimuli (or those of [21]).
On the other hand, our probes were more accurate than
the embedding similarities when classifying our disyllabic test
stimuli, even for the PT model. Although it is tempting to in-
terpret high probing accuracy as indicating the model ‘encodes’
tonal context, it is more accurate to say that it indicates that
the model has learned a representation in which the probed cat-
egories areaccessible. If the categories in question correlate
with other properties in the training data, even a simple linear
model may be able to find a fit to subtle correlations that do
not directly reflect the property of interest [37]. In future work,
we intend to supplement our analysis measures with causal in-
terchange interventions [17] and task-based evaluations [18], as
well as considering the effects of nonspeech analogs as in [21].
In summary, our results highlight a dissociation between
contextualization and perceptual compensation. Purely self-
supervised wav2vec2.0 representations showed no evidence
of compensation for tonal coarticulation, and even supervised
probes fit to fine-tuned representations diverged sharply from
responses of human listeners on isolated syllables, suggesting
that the learned representations rely on broader contextual con-
ditioning rather than biasing a context-invariant baseline. Taken
together, these results constrain accounts of perceptual compen-
sation by indicating that, at least for tones, human-like PC pat-
terns are unlikely to fall out of unsupervised contextual predic-
tion alone, but instead require additional learning mechanisms
that encourage the emergence of stable phonological category
representations.
1527
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
No generative AI or AI-assisted technologies were used in the
research process or the preparation of this manuscript.