PyPhonPlan: Simulating phonetic planning with dynamic neural fields and
task dynamics
Sam Kirkham ID
Phonetics Laboratory, Lancaster University, United Kingdom
s.kirkham@lancaster.ac.uk
Abstract
We introduce PyPhonPlan, a Python toolkit for implementing
dynamical models of phonetic planning using coupled dynamic
neural fields and task dynamic simulations. The toolkit pro-
vides modular components for defining planning, perception
and memory fields, as well as between-field coupling, gestu-
ral inputs, and using field activation profiles to solve tract vari-
able trajectories. We illustrate the toolkit’s capabilities through
an example application: simulating production/perception loops
with a coupled memory field, which demonstrates the frame-
work’s ability to model interactive speech dynamics using rep-
resentations that are temporally-principled, neurally-grounded,
and phonetically-rich. PyPhonPlan is released as open-source
software and contains executable examples to promote repro-
ducibility, extensibility, and cumulative computational develop-
ment for speech communication research.
Index Terms: computational modeling, phonetic planning, dy-
namic neural fields, task dynamics, speech production
1. Introduction
The production of speech appears at first to be unfathomably
complex. Speakers must navigate the precise temporal coor-
dination of a high-dimensional neuromuscular space with many
degrees-of-freedom, with the ultimate goal of shaping a channel
of moving air to achieve meaningful action in a rich social en-
vironment. Despite this apparent complexity, there is abundant
evidence across biological motor control that organisms sim-
plify the control of high-dimensional movement by constraining
it to a smaller number of functionally relevant variables [1, 2].
In the domain of speech production, one of the most popular
models of these functionally relevant variables is task dynam-
ics [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Task dynamics hypothesizes that an ab-
stract dynamical force called a gesture drives low-dimensional
tract variables that control geometric properties of the vocal
tract, such as lip aperture (LA) or tongue tip constriction degree
(TTCD). Tract variables are a hypothesized coordinate system
in which articulatory goals are defined, and are achieved by flex-
ibly reconfiguring groups of articulators (tongue tip, lower lip,
jaw) to meet the ongoing demands of speech.
A fundamental assumption in task dynamics is that tract
variables are governed by point attractor dynamics, where a ges-
ture drives a tract variable toward an equilibrium position. How-
ever, in conventional task dynamic models, these target values
are stipulated as invariant parameters, with no intrinsic mech-
anism for learning, memory or sensory influences on speech
production. A major development in this respect is the inte-
gration of dynamic neural fields for movement planning with
task dynamic theory [9, 10]. A dynamic neural field (DNF) is
a low-dimensional representation of a functional neural popu-
lation, which is defined over a metric variable for a sensory or
movement parameter [11, 12]. The field’s dynamics evolve over
time under the influence of sensory inputs, memory, and field-
internal dynamics [13, 14].
The last decade has produced a number of DNF models
for speech planning [9, 10, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23].
While much of this work has focused on relatively low-level
phonetic variation, there is increasing evidence that DNFs can
also model more traditionally ‘phonological’ phenomena [24],
as well as lexical meaning [25]. An excellent review of DNF
models for speech communication can be found in [26]. In
light of the current landscape, there is a need to develop mod-
ern computational frameworks that make this integration of dy-
namic neural fields and task dynamics accessible to a broader
community. To address this gap, we introduce PyPhonPlan,
a Python toolkit for simulating phonetic planning using cou-
pled dynamic neural fields and task dynamic equations. The
toolkit provides modular components for defining activation
fields, coupling architectures, gestural inputs, and task dynamic
simulations. This allows researchers to instantiate diverse plan-
ning architectures within a common computational framework
that is tailored towards speech communication research. Exist-
ing DNF frameworks, such as COSIVINA [12] and its Python
port [27], are general-purpose simulators, whereas PyPhonPlan
directly integrates DNFs with task dynamic models of articu-
latory control, thus providing a unified planning-to-production
framework. The major contributions of this paper are:
1. An open-source Python toolkit for simulating phonetic plan-
ning using coupled DNFs and task dynamics.
2. A modular architecture for flexible model development and
customization, including multi-layer fields, coupling mecha-
nisms, memory fields, and tract variable simulations.
3. Examples and code notebooks to promote reproducibility, ex-
tensibility, and cumulative computational research.
The rest of this paper outlines the model components, be-
fore illustrating its functionality via a highly-simplified three-
layer perception/planning/memory model of interactive speech.
All software and examples are available on GitHub at:
https://github.com/samkirkham/PyPhonPlan.
2. Model architecture and implementation
In this section, we review the components of the dynamic field
model implemented in PyPhonPlan. For an excellent and exten-
sive tutorial introduction to dynamic neural fields see [12].
2.1. Field dynamics
The dynamics of a one-dimensional articulatory or acoustic
control variable can be formalized as a dynamic neural field
6553
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1804
0 50 100 150 200 250
Time (ms)
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
Parameter
Planning field
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Activation
Figure 1: Heatmap of the planning-layer of a DNF with two
competing inputs at x =−5 andx = +5. The red line indi-
cates the start of above-threshold activation; the dotted white
line tracks the location of above-threshold peak activation.
[11], with activation across a neural population defined over the
metric range ofx,
τ ˙u(x,t ) =−u(x,t ) +h +s(x,t )
+
Z
k(x−x′)g(u(x′,t ))dx′ +qξ(x,t ), (1)
where τ dictates the rate of field evolution and u(x,t ) is
time-dependent activation at each field site x. The negative
sign−u(x,t ) ensures stable decay towards the resting level h.
s(x,t ) represents sensory input to the field, andξ(x,t ) is Gaus-
sian noise scaled by a coefficientq [12]. The interaction kernel
k(x−x′) defines excitatory and inhibitory forces across the
DNF, which is explained in Section 2.3.
2.2. Inputs
The field in (1) has its own intrinsic dynamics, but without sen-
sory input the field’s dynamics will converge to a sub-threshold
resting level. Inputs to the DNF drive activation away from the
resting level and excite localized areas of the field. Inputs can
represent task-related input (i.e. responding to an experimen-
tal prompt or cue), retrieval of a speech planning representation
from memory, or sensory/perceptual inputs (i.e. speech percep-
tion). An inputs(x,t ) is defined as a distribution over a param-
eterx with amplitudea, centroidp and widthw,
s(x,t ) =
X
i
ai exp

−(x−pi)2
2w2
i

. (2)
This defines gestural inputs as inherently distributional, in
contrast to the invariant target values in many task dynamic im-
plementations. Inputs are typically time-bound; in the current
implementation, timing is manually stipulated, but we discuss
more principled timing mechanisms in Section 4. Figure 1 visu-
alizes the dynamics of a single DNF, where two time-scheduled
inputs atx =−5 andx = +5 drive activation above the resting
level at different field locations.
2.3. Field interactions and thresholds
A key property of DNFs is that field sites interact with one an-
other: nearby sites excite each other while distant sites inhibit
0 50 100 150 200 250
Time (ms)
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
Parameter
Memory field
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Activation
Figure 2: Memory field coupled to the planning field in Figure 1.
The memory trace reflects a history of above-threshold planning
activation, with a broader spatial profile due to convolution with
w(x−x′).
each other. This interaction profile has two key consequences: it
stabilizes peaks of activation once they form (through local self-
excitation), and it enables competition between peaks, where
activation of one peak will inhibit others. These dynamics are
captured by the interaction kernel k(x− x′), which takes a
‘Mexican hat’ profile, with local excitationcexcite surrounded by
lateral inhibitioncinhibit, plus a global inhibition termcglobal:
k(x−x′) = cexcitep
2πσ 2
excite
exp

−(x−x′)2
2σ2
excite

− cinhibitp
2πσ 2
inhibit
exp

−(x−x′)2
2σ2
inhibit

−cglobal. (3)
The interaction kernel is gated by a sigmoid function,
g(u) = 1
1 + exp(−β(u−α)), (4)
where β is the slope of the sigmoid and α is a threshold
parameter (typically α = 0). This ensures that only field sites
with activation aboveα contribute to the interaction dynamics.
2.4. Memory field
In addition to the standard fields described above, PyPhonPlan
implements memory fields (see Figure 2), which are a special
kind of field coupled to the planning field that stores a his-
tory of activation traces [28]. This stored history can then bias
the planning field on subsequent productions. Memory dynam-
ics are implemented as a Hebbian layer over the memory field
umem(x,t ) in (5) subject to local interactionsw(x−x′).
˙umem(x,t ) =



1
τmem
[−umem(x,t )
+
R
w(x−x′)g(u(x′,t ))dx′], u (x,t )>α
1
τdecay
[−umem(x,t )], u (x,t )≤α
.
(5)
When the planning field u(x,t ) exceeds the α threshold,
the sigmoid g(u) determines the pattern of activation that is
convolved into the memory field, at a rate determined by τmem.
6554
Whenu(x,t )≤α, memory decays at a rate ofτdecay. The mem-
ory field evolves on a slower timescale than the planning field,
while memory decay is slowest, such thatτdecay >τ mem >τ .
2.5. Cross-field coupling
In multi-layer models, fields can be coupled with strength c,
weighting the influence of perception or memory on planning.
However, a strong perceptual input could push the planning
field over the activation threshold, involuntarily triggering pro-
duction even when no response input is present. PyPhonPlan
avoids this via an (optional) latched gate on the planning field:
γ(t) =



1 ifsplanning(x,t )> 0 for anyx,
γ(t− ∆t) ifuplanning(x,t )>α for anyx,
0 otherwise
. (6)
Whenγ(t) = 0 , activation is clamped so it cannot exceed
thresholdα, ensuring that coupling from perception or memory
can shape sub-threshold activation but cannot initiate produc-
tion without an explicit input cue. The gate opens (γ = 1) when
direct input arrives to the planning field (splanning(x,t )> 0) and
holds its value (γ(t− ∆t)) while activation is above-threshold.
2.6. Task dynamics
We integrate DNF planning dynamics with a critically-damped
harmonic oscillator model [5] for the evolution of tract vari-
ables, wherem = 1,k is a constant, andb = 2
√
k,
m¨x +b ˙x +k(x−x∗(t)) = 0. (7)
Following [17, 21, 24], we derive the tract variable’s time-
varying targetx∗(t) from the planning DNF. The spatial posi-
tionx corresponding to peak activation in u from the planning
field at each time step is taken as the planned target value as in
(8). An alternative formulation is to use a single constant value
forx∗(t), which can be derived from identifying the parameter
value that corresponds to a peak activation plateau.
x∗(t) = arg max
x
u(x,t ). (8)
In addition to the above core components, PyPhonPlan con-
tains methods for visualization, animations, extracting DNF ac-
tivation peaks, task dynamic solvers, and example simulation
cases. See the GitHub repository for further information.
3. Application: Coupled
perception-planning-memory dynamics
The PyPhonPlan GitHub repository contains fully-documented
code notebooks for a range of DNF simulation cases. In this
section, we present a three-layer model of phonetic shadowing
[29], which couples perception, planning and memory fields,
and simulates tract variables from DNF activations. Parameter
values and additional information can be found in the GitHub
repository at examples/shadowing.ipynb.
3.1. Three-layer field
We define a three-layer architecture of perception, planning and
memory fields. For the sake of simplicity, we assume an arbi-
trary parameter space for x∈ [−10, 10], which is a hypoth-
esized articulatory dimension. We first model the perception
field as capturing the influence of auditory perception on the
planning field, rather than modelling the auditory-acoustic sig-
nal directly. The perception field takes the form
τperception ˙uperception(x,t ) =−uperception(x,t )+h+sperception(x,t )
+
Z
z(x−x′)g(uperception(x′,t ))dx′ +qξ(x,t ), (9)
wherez(x−x′) is a perception-specific interaction kernel.
The advantage of a separate perception field, rather than per-
ception as a simple input to the planning field, is that it allows
perception to have its own intrinsic timescale and stabilization
dynamics (e.g. competition between perceptual inputs).
The memory field is implemented exactly as described in
Section 2.4, so Equation (5) is not repeated here. The speech
planning field also follows the generic DNF architecture,
τ ˙u(x,t ) =−u(x,t ) +h +cperceptionuperception(x,t )
+cmemoryumemory(x,t ) +cresponsesresponse(x,t )
+
Z
k(x−x′)g(u(x′,t ))dx′ +qξ(x,t ), (10)
but with coupling to uperception(x,t ) andumemory(x,t ) with
strengths cperception and cmemory. These weights reflect the rel-
ative strength of perception/memory coupling, such as atten-
tional strength or socially-modulated perception. In the fol-
lowing example, the interaction between production/perception
fields is linear and unidirectional (perception→ planning). The
inputsresponse(x,t ) is a response input, prompted by retrieving
an appropriate motor plan in response to a cue to speak. The
γ-gating described in Section 2.5 prevents perceptual coupling
from involuntarily triggering production, but residual percep-
tion activation at response onset can bias the spatial location
of peak formation. The memory field coupling umemory(x,t )
means that the current state of memory additionally influences
the planning field, while the memory field is simultaneously up-
dated as a consequence of ongoing planning dynamics.
3.2. Simulating phonetic shadowing
We now simulate field dynamics during a simple shadowing
task paradigm [29], which takes the following form:
1. Baseline: speaker produces a word cued by an orthographic
representation on a computer screen.
2. Shadow: speaker hears a (pre-recorded) talker producing the
same word and is prompted to repeat the word they hear.
3. Washout: speaker again produces the same word, cued by an
orthographic representation on a computer screen.
Human speakers typically show phonetic convergence to-
wards the interlocutor’s voice during shadowing, with limited
evidence for persistent post-shadowing convergence [29, 30].
In this sense, the shadowing task represents a highly constrained
form of phonetic accommodation, whereby speakers adapt their
speech in response to an interlocutor’s speech. The simulations
in this section follow the same structure as the above shadowing
task paradigm; we simulate 1 baseline trial, 10 shadowing trials,
and 1 washout trial. Note thatsresponse(x,t ) = 3 is the speaker’s
intended production and sperception(x,t ) = 1 is the auditory
prompt. As the intentional production and auditory prompt dif-
fer, this creates the opportunity for convergence effects during
shadowing. During each trial,umemory(x,t ) is updated based on
the current activation profile in the planning field. This predicts
6555
BL S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8 S9 S10 WO
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Peak position
Planning peak position
Response (3.0)
Perception (1.0)
0 25 50 75 100 125 150
Time (ms)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Tract variable
Tract variable trajectories
Baseline
Washout
Figure 3: Shadowing simulation results. Left: planning peak position across baseline with no perceptual input (BL), 10 shadowing
trials with strong perceptual input (S1–S10), and washout with no perceptual input (WO). Right: tract variable trajectories for baseline
versus washout, showing subtle articulatory consequences of memory-driven convergence.
that our model speaker should converge to the perceptual input,
and the resulting memory field may show evidence of conver-
gence during washout. Perception t = [0, 100] and response
t = [100, 200] inputs are timed sequentially, with the percep-
tion field time constant (τ = 10) providing residual bias during
planning peak formation.
3.3. Simulation results
Figure 3 shows simulation results. The left panel shows the lo-
cation of peak activation measured during the response across
all trials. During baseline, the planning peak settles at the re-
sponse position ( x = 3 ). During shadowing, the auditory
prompt (x = 1 ) induces a strong perception input that draws
the planning peak toward the perceived token ( x = 1.56 on
S1), a bias that persists across shadowing trials. The washout
planning peak retains some of this convergence effect, shifting
−0.29 units from baseline (x = 2.71). This shift is driven by
accumulated memory traces from shadowing trials, which bias
the planning field. The right panel shows the corresponding
tract variable trajectories for baseline and washout trials, with
targets derived from the plateau peak positions. The washout
trajectory reaches a lower target position than baseline, demon-
strating how field-level convergence propagates to articulatory
output. This is a simple, artificial example for the purpose of il-
lustration; accommodation is rarely one-shot and of such large
magnitude. Yet it illustrates how the model architecture predicts
interactional phonetic phenomena as emergent from the coupled
dynamics of speech planning, perception and memory.
4. Discussion
PyPhonPlan lowers the barrier to entry for dynamical models
of phonetic planning, with a computational toolkit that is tai-
lored to the requirements of researchers in speech communica-
tion. The flexible and modular architecture permits a range of
simulation designs, with further examples in the GitHub repos-
itory. Several design choices leave room for further extension.
One area for significant improvement is that input timing is cur-
rently stipulated. Future versions could implement coupled os-
cillator models [31], conditions of satisfaction for input deacti-
vation [32, 33], or competitive queuing for selection-activation
dynamics [34, 35]. Second, the current task dynamic integra-
tion extracts time-varying targets from field peaks but lacks
the full articulator-to-tract-variable mapping characteristic of
standard models [5]. Third, the models shown here are 1D
articulatory variables, but DNFs can scale to 2–4 dimensions
for capturing multi-dimensional features (such as formants or
x/y coordinates). However, DNFs do not scale well to much
higher dimensions; while this encourages an interpretable and
biophysically-grounded approach, it constrains modelling of
high-dimensional problems and requires well-motivated theo-
retical commitments about which control variables to model.
A longer-term aim is to integrate PyPhonPlan with an ex-
tended Task Dynamic Application (TADA) architecture [36],
enabling the use of gestural scores as inputs to the DNF and
providing time-varying targets to the full TADA articulatory
model. State feedback control is another important frontier;
models such as FACTS [37] incorporate feedback into the task
dynamic framework, while DNF [23] and other dynamical [35]
architectures for feedback monitoring also show promise. Fi-
nally, the coupling of speaker-listener DNFs will facilitate new
agent-based models of interactive speech dynamics, with the
advantage of inherently dynamic and rich phonetic representa-
tions. For example, exemplar models of speech processing tend
towards static phonetic representations, where memory retrieval
and execution are instantaneous [38]. In contrast, the DNF ar-
chitecture explicitly models the dynamics of memory, percep-
tion and production, with dynamics specified at every scale.
5. Conclusion
In conclusion, PyPhonPlan is an open-source toolkit for build-
ing flexible models of phonetic planning using coupled dynamic
neural fields and task dynamics. It provides a modular architec-
ture that supports reproducible experimentation and transparent
model development, thereby advancing a framework for cumu-
lative computational research in speech communication.
6556
6. Acknowledgments
S.K. was funded by AHRC fellowship AH/Y002822/1 and The
Royal Society grant APX\R1\251102, the latter of which was
also supported by The Leverhulme Trust.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Anthropic’s Claude Code (Opus 4.6) was used for debugging
and automated testing of the accompanying software, with so-
lutions subsequently verified by the author. No Generative AI
was used in the writing of the manuscript.