Phonikud: Overcoming Phonetic Underspecification
for Hebrew Text-To-Speech
Yakov Kolani1, Maxim Melichov 2, Cobi Calev 3, Morris Alper ID 4,5
1 Independent Researcher 2 Reichman University, Israel 3 Cisco Systems
4 Tel Aviv University, Israel 5 Carnegie Mellon University, USA
phonikud@gmail.com
Abstract
Text-to-speech (TTS) for Modern Hebrew is challenged by the
language’s orthographic complexity, with existing solutions ig-
noring underspecified phonetic features such as stress. We
present a framework for more phonetically accurate Hebrew
TTS with four contributions: (1) Phonikud, an open-source He-
brew grapheme-to-phoneme (G2P) system that outputs fully-
specified International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) transcriptions,
designed by augmenting a base diacritizer. (2) The ILSpeech
corpus of paired Hebrew audio, text, and expert IPA annota-
tions. (3) A benchmark for the previously unmeasured task
of Hebrew G2P conversion. (4) Hebrew audio-to-IPA models
capturing previously disregarded phonetic details for automatic
TTS evaluation. Our results show that Phonikud more accu-
rately predicts Hebrew phonemes than prior methods, and that
small, local TTS models with phonetic input from Phonikud ap-
proach large proprietary systems. We release our code, data,
and models at https://phonikud.github.io.
Index Terms : text-to-speech, grapheme-to-phoneme conver-
sion, low-resource languages
1. Introduction
Despite the Modern Hebrew language being spoken by approxi-
mately nine million people [1], it currently lacks an open-source
text-to-speech (TTS) system with adequate performance, crucial
for applications such as screen readers and smart home technol-
ogy. Standard techniques perform poorly due to phonetic un-
derspecification in the Hebrew script, which omits key phonetic
details for the reader to infer from context. For instance, the
wordרפס may be read as / sˈefer/1 (“book”), /sapˈar/ (“barber”),
/safˈar/ (“he counted”), or / sfar/ (“suburb”). Optional vowel di-
acritics ( nikud) are mostly confined to pedagogical texts such
as dictionaries and still leave phonetic ambiguity. For example,
the vocalized (with vowel diacritics) wordהָריִּב may be read
as either / bˈira/ (“beer”) or / birˈa/ (“capital city”), as the vowel
diacritics do not specify lexical stress. This challenges TTS sys-
tems, which must receive unvocalized Hebrew text as input.
Existing approaches either map unvocalized Hebrew text di-
rectly to audio [2, 3] or predict vowel diacritics and train TTS
models on vocalized text [4, 5]. However, these approaches fail
to fully resolve phonetic underspecification as in the example
above, leading to salient phonetic inaccuracies. Moreover, ex-
isting automatic evaluation methods cannot detect such failures.
The standard approach is to apply automatic speech recognition
(ASR) to synthesized audio and compare to the input text, but
this is ineffective for Hebrew: standard Hebrew ASR models
1Following TTS conventions, we place stress marks directly before
the stressed vowel (/ sˈefer/) rather than the syllable onset (/ ˈsefer/).
output unvocalized text, making them blind to errors in vowel
quality and stress placement.
We address both the production and evaluation gaps with
a unified framework, consisting of four contributions: (1) We
introduce Phonikud, a grapheme-to-phoneme (G2P) conversion
pipeline that resolves phonetic ambiguities in written Hebrew.
We adapt an existing state-of-the-art model for predicting He-
brew vowel diacritics [6], adding lightweight adaptors to predict
additional phonetic features needed for unambiguous G2P con-
version. This enables Hebrew TTS models trained on a fully-
specified phonemic representation. (2) We contribute the IL-
Speech corpus, consisting of high-quality Hebrew speech with
paired audio, text, and expert International Phonetic Alphabet
(IPA) annotations. (3) Using ILSpeech, we establish a bench-
mark for Hebrew G2P, capturing previously unmeasured fea-
tures such as stress placement. (4) We train Hebrew audio-to-
IPA ASR models on ILSpeech, enabling automatic TTS evalu-
ation that captures phonetic details that were previously disre-
garded. Our experiments show that these contributions, taken
together, enable small, local Hebrew TTS models (<100M pa-
rameters) to approach the quality of large proprietary systems,
confirmed by both automatic metrics and user preferences.
We release 2 our data, code, and models to support the de-
velopment of accessible Hebrew speech technology.
2. Phonetic Underspecification in Hebrew
Hebrew is normally written without vowel marks ( unvocalized
text), but even when these are added ( vocalized text ) it is still
underspecified for various phonetic features that are needed for
accurate TTS. These may be split into three primary issues:
Stress. Lexical stress is only partially predictable from word
shape and part of speech in Hebrew [7]. As illustrated by the
minimal pair / txˈina/ (“tahini”) vs. / txinˈa/ (“grinding”), both
spelledהָניִחְט stress is not indicated in the orthography even
when vowel marks are provided.
Shva. The vowel mark shva is polyvalent, being either silent or
pronounced as /e/ depending on complex morpho-phonological
rules with many irregularities [8]. For example, inןֹודְנֹולְּב 
/belˈondon/ (“in London”) the shva vowel between the first
two consonants is pronounced, while inיִניִּדְנֹולְּב /blondˈini/
(“blonde”) it is silent.
Irregular words. Infrequently, words may deviate from regu-
lar pronunciation rules. A notable case is loanwords containing
the phoneme /w/, written identically to / v/. For example,ןיִוְּגְניִּפ 
/pˈinɡwin/ (“penguin”) is indistinguishable from the hypotheti-
cal form */ pˈinɡvin/.
2https://phonikud.github.io
2922
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-604
Figure 1: The Phonikud grapheme-to-phoneme pipeline. Phonikud converts unvocalized Hebrew text into fully-specified IPA in
two steps: First, an enhanced diacritization module adds standard vowel marks and enhanced phonetic symbols to each letter. This
uses a frozen (ice symbol) base diacritization model and its per-character prediction head, augmented with a trainable (fire symbol)
linear adaptor for predicting enhanced diacritics that disambiguate phonetic ambiguities. Second, a rule-based transformation module
converts this text into IPA, which may be used to train performant TTS models.
3. Method
Our Phonikud system is illustrated in Figure 1. As a G2P
pipeline, Phonikud takes unvocalized Hebrew text as input and
outputs fully-specified IPA transcriptions, which can then be
used to train efficient Hebrew TTS systems. We proceed to de-
scribe the two key components of this system—an enhanced di-
acritization module (Section 3.1) and rule-based IPA conversion
module (Section 3.2)—followed by the novel procedure used for
training the system’s learnable components (Section 3.3).
3.1. Enhanced Diacritization
Rather than learning to transcribe from scratch, we leverage ex-
isting models that efficiently add vowel diacritics to Hebrew
text with high accuracy. Our key insight is to augment these
with lightweight prediction heads for additional symbols that
are needed to resolve phonetic ambiguity. This adds a negligible
number of parameters, enabling efficient inference and keeping
performance on standard diacritic prediction fixed.
As our base diacritization model, we adopt DictaBERT [6]
fine-tuned for Hebrew diacritization ( dicta-il/dictabert-
large-char-menaked), a ∼300M parameter encoder with lin-
ear token classification heads for Hebrew diacritics. We freeze
this model and add three enhanced diacritics that can be pre-
dicted via a new, trainable two-layer multilayer perceptron head
(hidden dimension 256, ReLU activation). These new symbols
are: (1) a superscript angle indicating a non-final stressed syl-
lable (e.g.םֶחֶ֫ל 2) a subscript line indicating a shva vowel
pronounced as /e/ (e.g.הָחיִתְֽמ and (3) a vertical bar indicating
ַֿה |דֹוּק The first two directly
indicate missing phonetic features, while the last aids dictionary
matching of irregular words, resolving the issues from Section 2.
These graphemes, which include traditional Biblical cantillation
marks, are chosen because they are not used in ordinary writing.
3.2. Rule-Based IPA Conversion
After generating enhanced vocalized forms (e.g.םֶחֶ֫ל the
phonemic representation can be unambiguously determined.
We apply a deterministic, rule-based algorithm to convert this
to standard IPA (e.g. / ˈlexem/), primarily implemented with a
finite-state transducer and dictionary matching. This handles
orthographic complexities such as many-to-one grapheme map-
pings (e.g.טֿת both represent / t/), non-monotonic se-
quences (e.g.ַחיֵר represents / rˈeax/ and not the linear order
reading */ rˈexa/), dual-function letters (e.g.וmay function as
a consonant or vowel), and irregular words.
3.3. Training Procedure
A fundamental challenge is the lack of existing ground-truth
(GT) annotations for Hebrew phonetic features like lexical
stress. To address this limitation, we employ a human-in-the-
loop procedure to distill knowledge from existing resources
along with manual refinement. We semi-automatically anno-
tate a large-scale Hebrew corpus with stress placement, prefix
boundaries, and shva realization, and then distill this knowledge
into our model via fine-tuning.
To produce large-scale data with these pseudo-GT annota-
tions, we adopt the IsraParlTweet corpus consisting of 5M lines
of Hebrew text [9]. We leverage Dicta’s ( https://dicta.
org.il) morpho-phonological analysis API and known linguis-
tic rules to automatically predict stress placement, prefix bound-
aries, and shva realization. Since this is often inaccurate, we
manually correct errors by sorting word types (after clitic seg-
mentation) by frequency, correcting a set including the 1K most
common items. We train our G2P model on these pseudo-labels
until early stopping is triggered ( ∼6 epochs, batch size 256,
learning rate 5e-3, 5% validation split).
2923
4. ILSpeech
4.1. Corpus Description
We introduce ILSpeech, a high-quality Hebrew speech corpus
with paired audio, text, and expert-annotated phonetic transcrip-
tions. As existing Hebrew audio corpora [10, 11, 12, 13, 4, 14,
15] lack IPA transcriptions, ILSpeech newly enables evaluation
of previously unmeasured features such as stress placement. IL-
Speech serves two complementary roles: (1) its text and IPA an-
notations are used to benchmark G2P conversion (Section 5.1),
and (2) its audio-IPA pairs supervise audio-to-IPA ASR models
(Section 4.2) for automatic TTS evaluation, capturing phonetic
details disregarded by standard Hebrew ASR.
ILSpeech consists of approximately two hours of Hebrew
speech from two speakers. The speech content includes diverse
topics covering science, technology, history, and everyday con-
versational speech. Audio was recorded in studio at 44kHz, en-
hanced using Adobe Enhance [16], and normalized to 22.05kHz.
It was then segmented with voice activity detection with man-
ual refinement, yielding 4–14s segments. Hebrew and IPA tran-
scripts were added via expert annotation. Explicit written con-
sent was obtained from the speakers, who were informed about
the intended use and data licensing. We release ILSpeech under
a non-commercial license with ethical use requirements.
4.2. ASR for Hebrew Audio-to-IPA
As discussed in Section 1, standard Hebrew ASR outputs un-
vocalized text, making it blind to phonetic features such as
vowel quality and stress. This limits its applicability to au-
tomatic evaluation of TTS systems, where ASR is applied to
generations and compared to the original input text. To over-
come this issue, we use ILSpeech to train ASR models for He-
brew audio-to-IPA conversion, enabling automatic TTS eval-
uation that captures these phonetic details. For our tests, we
fine-tune a Hebrew ASR model ( openai/whisper-small) on
IPA-audio pairs from ILSpeech. When evaluated on a held-out
subset of 150 synthetic utterances with manually-verified IPA
transcriptions, this achieves a word error rate (WER) of 24.71%
and a character error rate (CER) of 5.47%, sufficient for our
purposes (supported by our complementary TTS user study; see
Section 5.2). We use this model for automatic TTS metrics as
described below, and release it for community use in bench-
marking future Hebrew TTS.
5. Experiments
We evaluate G2P conversion with Phonikud against existing
baselines (Section 5.1), compare downstream TTS performance
(Section 5.2), and ablate key system components (Section 5.3).
All training runs were conducted on a single RTX4090 GPU
(24GB VRAM). Reported error rate metrics are aggregated
at the sample level, and p-values are calculated using paired
Wilcoxon signed-rank tests (with Bonferroni correction, when
multiple tests are performed). Full qualitative results are pro-
vided at our project page: https://phonikud.github.io.
5.1. G2P Evaluation
Phonikud G2P results are shown in Table 1, benchmarked
against GT IPA annotations from ILSpeech. Due to compute
requirements of some models in our comparison, we evaluate
on a random subset of 100 samples; our statistical tests below
confirm significance at this sample size. We calculate word-
and character error rates (WER, CER), WER ignoring stress
Table 1: G2P evaluation benchmarked on ILSpeech (random
100-item subset). Best results are in bold (separately for re-
altime and LLM-based systems). All values are percentages.
We illustrate performance on a Hebrew phrase with GT / bˈoker
tˈovֿ∗Diacritizers use our IPA conversion with defaults for
ambiguous features like stress.
Model WER ↓ WERσ↓ CER↓ EM↑בוטרקוב 
Realtime Systems
Phonikud (Ours) 17.4 12.2 3.8 17.0 bˈoker tˈov
Diacritizers∗
DictaBERT 39.5 25.6 8.3 2.0 bokˈer tˈov
Nakdimon 40.5 27.2 8.7 2.0 bokˈer tˈov
Multilingual G2P
eSpeak NG 100.0 95.1 44.0 0.0 vvkr tov
CharsiuG2P 100.0 100.0 70.6 0.0 boːʔab têːb
LLM-based Systems (non-realtime)
Claude Opus 4.6 25.3 19.0 5.1 10.0 bˈoker tˈov
Gemini 3.1 Pro 13.9 11.8 2.8 16.0 bˈoker tˈov
(WERσ), and exact match (EM; entire output is correct) percent-
ages. We compare to two baselines: the existing state-of-the-art
Hebrew diacritizers DictaBERT [6] and Nakdimon [17] with our
IPA conversion (using reasonable defaults for ambiguous fea-
tures such as stress), and multilingual G2P libraries ostensibly
supporting Hebrew—eSpeak NG [18] and CharsiuG2P [19].
We also provide G2P results using large language model
(LLM) prompting with two leading models: Claude Opus
4.6 [20] and Gemini 3.1 Pro [21], both using chain-of-thought
reasoning (high thinking) and applied to individual sentences.
While these large, proprietary models are costly and too slow
for realtime applications, they are given as a potential upper
bound on performance. Inference used temperature 1.0 and a
fixed prompt specifying IPA conventions, including stress mark
positioning and punctuation retention.
Our system outperforms all realtime baselines and ap-
proaches the best LLM-based system. Stress prediction signif-
icantly improves performance over existing diacritizers, while
multilingual G2P systems are nearly unusable for Hebrew due to
limited dictionary support for common words (eSpeak NG) and
extensive hallucinations (CharsiuG2P). This advantage is con-
firmed as statistically significant (all comparisons to Phonikud
have p < 10−10). Errors in our method’s outputs stem from
both occasional mistakes in predicting features such as stress,
as well from limitations of the base diacritization model.
5.2. Downstream TTS Evaluation
Evaluations and comparisons of downstream TTS performance
are shown in Tables 2 and 3. We fine-tune the light-weight
Piper (VITS) [22, 23] and StyleTTS2 [24] architectures on syn-
thetic Hebrew audio (20 hours, via Gemini 2.5 Pro)—converting
GT undiacritized Hebrew transcriptions to IPA with Phonikud.
We initialize from pre-trained English TTS checkpoints and
train for ∼10 hours using default hyperparameters. For Piper,
we use the High model size (32M parameters). During infer-
ence, we use Phonikud to convert input Hebrew text to IPA
used for synthesis. We compare to various open-source Hebrew
and multilingual TTS models: MMS [5], the SASPEECH base-
2924
Table 2: TTS comparison. Word and character error rates
(WER, CER), real-time factor (RTF), and parameter counts for
leading Hebrew TTS models, tested on SASPEECH (100 sam-
ples). Best results are in bold (separately for open and propri-
etary systems). Error rates are percentages.
Model WER ↓ CER↓ RTF↓ # Params
Open Systems
Phonikud-Based Models
Piper (High) 44.3 10.5 0.13 32M
StyleTTS2 35.2 8.9 0.50 90M
Open Source Models
Robo-Shaul 50.4 14.9 1.58 28M
SASPEECH 68.1 21.0 0.16 28M
MMS 63.6 19.6 0.21 36M
HebTTS 68.7 23.3 25.4 420M
Proprietary Systems
Gemini 29.4 6.6 0.80 —
OpenAI 35.0 8.7 1.60 —
Table 3: TTS stress evaluation. We manually evaluate the fre-
quency of incorrectly synthesized stress on 250 Hebrew sen-
tences with challenging lexical stress patterns, comparing our
full method, our method without stress (ours −σ), and a leading
prior model. We report word error rate (WER) and exact match
frequency (EM; all words in sentence have correct stress), with
best results given in bold. All values are percentages.
WER↓ EM↑
Ours 3.2 77.0
Ours−σ 8.4 46.4
Robo-Shaul 6.6 56.8
line [4], and Robo-Shaul [25] all use two-stage approaches (di-
acritization followed by speech synthesis), while HebTTS [2]
synthesizes speech end-to-end from undiacritized Hebrew text.
We also compare to proprietary systems (Google’s Gemini 2.5
Flash [26], OpenAI’s GPT-4o mini [27]). The evaluation sen-
tences from SASPEECH are in-distribution for some of these
models (unlike our method).
Table 2 reports error rates calculated using our audio-to-
IPA ASR (Section 4.2), along with Real-Time Factor (RTF) and
parameter counts. Open-source models are evaluated on stan-
dard consumer hardware (macOS M1) without GPU accelera-
tion to reflect edge computing scenarios, while proprietary mod-
els use their cloud APIs. We evaluate on 100 randomly selected
SASPEECH [4] samples containing at least six words without
special characters. We achieve superior phonetic accuracy and a
favorable trade-off between latency and performance compared
to open models, confirmed as statistically significant (all com-
parisons to StyleTTS2 with Phonikud have p < 10−8). We also
achieve competitive results relative to proprietary systems.
We further test downstream quality with a comparative
mean opinion score (CMOS) user study (9 native Hebrew
speakers, 20 sentences covering diverse everyday topics) us-
ing a 7-point scale (-3 to +3), comparing our strongest system
(StyleTTS2 with Phonikud) to the leading open system (Robo-
Shaul). Our system is preferred with CMOS +1.3 for naturalness
(p < 10−4) and +0.7 for content fidelity ( p < 0.01), validating
Table 4: Ablation study showing downstream effects on TTS.
Best results are given in bold, and all values are percentages.
Removing our enhanced diacritics and basic vowels both de-
grade performance, while IPA conversion has little effect.
Model WER ↓ CER↓
Ours 49.9 13.3
-enhanced diacritization 55.0 15.5
-IPA conversion 56.1 15.4
-vowel diacritics 69.4 23.2
the superior practical utility of TTS trained with Phonikud.
To quantify our method’s effect on phonetic details salient
to native speakers, we curate a test set of 250 sentences cov-
ering Hebrew lexical stress ambiguities (i.e., homographs with
context-dependent stress) and manually evaluate stress accuracy
in generations (Table 3). We compare our full method, our
method without stress (trained and evaluated without IPA stress
marks), and a leading baseline (Robo-Shaul). Our full method
performs significantly better at stress placement ( p < 10−7
for all comparisons), confirming that other methods more fre-
quently create perceptually salient stress errors.
5.3. Ablations
We ablate key parts of our system in Table 4, testing their ef-
fect on downstream TTS performance. For these tests, we fix
the base TTS model and training settings – using Piper Medium
(20M parameters) and using fewer training iterations and less
data than in the comparisons above, for a light-weight ablation
study. All comparisons between our full system and other set-
tings are statistically significant (all p < 0.004). Removing en-
hanced diacritization hurts performance overall, consistent with
our manual evaluation above. Removing IPA conversion (i.e.
training directly on vocalized Hebrew text) has a minimal effect,
showing that IPA conversion preserves the essential phonetic
content needed to synthesize speech, while providing practical
advantages such as interpretability and cross-lingual standard-
ization. Training directly on undiacritized Hebrew text leads to
incorrect vowel predictions, severely degrading performance.
6. Conclusion
We have presented a framework for phonetically accurate He-
brew TTS, consisting of Phonikud for G2P conversion, the IL-
Speech corpus with expert IPA annotations, a benchmark for
Hebrew G2P, and audio-to-IPA models for TTS evaluation.
Our experiments show that resolving phonetic underspecifica-
tion enables small TTS models to approach the quality of large
proprietary systems. Promising future directions include fine-
grained prosody control, support for code-switching, and text
normalization for symbols such as dates and addresses. More
broadly, we see promise in adapting our insights to other lan-
guages facing related challenges due to phonetic underspecifica-
tion, most directly for diacritized languages (Arabic, Urdu, etc.)
and more generally for languages with opaque orthographies.
Limitations. Our method inherits limitations from the underly-
ing Hebrew diacritization model, such as occasional vowel in-
accuracies and adherence to formal written Hebrew conventions
which may diverge from spoken norms (e.g. formal / sigrˈi/ vs.
informal / sgerˈi/ forירגס close! (f.)”). These limitations are
shared with existing Hebrew TTS methods.
2925
7. Acknowledgements
We thank Dicta for encouraging our work and for approving
our release of our model and data which incorporate their re-
sults. We also thank the speakers in ILSpeech for providing
an essential resource for the development of Hebrew language
technologies. We thank Oron Kam for assistance with ASR de-
velopment. Finally, we acknowledge Kush Jain, Shlomo Tan-
nor, Mark Kahn, and Shinji Watanabe for their helpful feedback
and suggestions.
8. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were only used for minor polishing of word-
ing in this manuscript and coding assistance.
9. References
[1] M. P. Lewis, Ed., Ethnologue: Languages of the World , six-
teenth ed. Dallas, TX, USA: SIL International, 2009.
[2] A. Roth, A. Turetzky, and Y. Adi, “A language modeling approach
to diacritic-free hebrew tts,” in Proc. Interspeech 2024 , 2024, pp.
2775–2779.
[3] E. Zeldes, O. Tal, and Y. Adi, “Enhancing tts stability in hebrew
using discrete semantic units,” in ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP). IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–5.
[4] O. Sharoni, R. Shenberg, and E. Cooper, “Saspeech: A hebrew
single speaker dataset for text to speech and voice conversion,” in
Proc. Interspeech, 2023.
[5] V. Pratap, A. Tjandra, B. Shi, P. Tomasello, A. Babu, S. Kundu,
A. Elkahky, Z. Ni, A. Vyas, M. Fazel-Zarandi et al. , “Scaling
speech technology to 1,000+ languages,” Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 25, no. 97, pp. 1–52, 2024.
[6] S. Shmidman, A. Shmidman, and M. Koppel, “Dictabert: A state-
of-the-art bert suite for modern hebrew,” 2023.
[7] D. Graf and A. Ussishkin, “Emergent iambs: stress in modern he-
brew,” Lingua, vol. 113, no. 3, pp. 239–270, 2003.
[8] W. Weinberg, “Spoken israeli hebrew: Trends in the departures
from classical phonology,” Journal of Semitic Studies , vol. 11,
no. 1, pp. 40–68, 1966.
[9