Controlled Generation of Synthetic Speaker Vectors for Voice Anonymization
Ekaterina Kolos1,∗∗, Sarina Meyer ID 1, Ngoc Thang Vu ID 1
1 Institute for Natural Language Processing, University of Stuttgart, Germany
ekaterina.kolos|sarina.meyer|thang.vu@ims.uni-stuttgart.de
Abstract
V oice anonymization benefits from transparent control over
the pseudo-speaker’s voice. Anonymization approaches based
on resynthesis substitute the original speaker vector with a dif-
ferent, often artificial, vector, but this does not allow for control-
ling which original speaker attributes are preserved. To address
this, we extend one existing WGAN-based artificial vector gen-
eration method with attribute-label conditioning. We also in-
troduce diffusion models as a robust alternative for generating
speaker vectors, utilizing classifier guidance for label-informed
synthesis. Evaluated using the V oice Privacy Challenge 2024
suite, both approaches demonstrate strong attribute control
while maintaining competitive privacy and utility. Further-
more, we propose measures for diversity, originality, and nat-
uralness of synthesized embeddings. Combined with TTS per-
formance on challenging speech, these measures enable the se-
lection of optimal generator configurations for the anonymiza-
tion pipeline.
Index Terms: voice anonymization, privacy, diffusion, GAN
1. Introduction
Humans can be identified through their voices, both by other
humans and by modern automatic speaker verification systems
with high accuracy [1, 2].Voice anonymizationaims to con-
ceal a speaker’s identity by modifying a recording so that lin-
guistic (and often paralinguistic) information remains but the
perceived speaker changes.
Preserving attributes like gender, age, or speaking style in
anonymized speech ensures human-centric authenticity (e.g.,
in whistle-blowing or counseling [3]) and protects data-driven
utility for downstream analysis e.g. in medical or behavioral
contexts. However, retaining group demographics introduces
a privacy-utility trade-off. While our experiments focused on
matching the source gender, our flexible mechanism can pre-
serve, modify, or standardize attributes depending on task-
specific policy objectives.
Ideally, the pseudo-speaker in the anonymized audio should
not resemble any real individual, who might reasonably object
to their voice being used to articulate specific content. To ad-
dress this, voice anonymization systems based on resynthesis
rely onartificial speaker vectors. Such vectors can be cre-
ated by averaging multiple natural vectors1 [4], or by sampling
a novel artificial voice with a generative model [5]. Previous
work has demonstrated the efficacy of unconditional generation
of speaker embeddings, such as the use of Generative Adver-
sarial Networks (GANs) [5] or speaker embedding diffusion
**indicates the corresponding author.
1A natural vector is a speaker vector extracted from the speech data
of a real human voice using a speaker embedding model.
models [6]. When integrated into a text-to-speech system, these
synthetic voices can produce naturally sounding voices while
representing no real person.
While these methods generate high-quality embeddings,
they often lack fine-grained control over the output’s charac-
teristics. Speaker vectors could theoretically be sampled from
a synthetic pool over and over again until the desired attribute
is present in the vector; the complexity of this would increase
with the number of attributes to be controlled at once. Recent
attempts have introduced control by discovering principal di-
rections in the latent space [7], however, this focuses rather on
changing attributes than preserving them. In this work, we di-
verge from latent-discovery approaches by suggesting methods
for explicit, transparent conditioning through categorical labels.
Specifically, we investigate the generation of synthetic speaker
embeddings by directly extending the GAN framework of the
V oice Privacy Challenge (VPC) 2024 [8] baseline B3 [9], while
introducing diffusion models. Because B3 inherently operates
on speaker vectors, it serves as the ideal foundational pipeline
for implementing our controllability methods. We implement
conditioning either by concatenating labels with noise vectors
[10] or via classifier guidance [11]. Evaluated within this
voice anonymization speech-to-text-to-speech (STTTS) frame-
work using new intermediate metrics, our approach 2 achieves
strong performance in privacy and utility, demonstrating effec-
tive gender conditioning and naturalness.
2. Voice Privacy System
Synthesis 
Module
Extraction 
Module
Anonymized 
Speech
Anonymization
Module
Unconditional
Vector Generator
Conditional Vector
Generator
Prosody Info
ASR
Speaker
Embedding
Gender LabelOriginal 
Speech
Setting: normal | copy gender
TTS
Vocoder
speech content
prosodic features
attribute
natural
vector
natural
vector
pseudo-
speaker 
vector
mel spectrogram
Figure 1:Pipeline of the B3 voice anonymization system, with
our proposed extensions for unconditional (blue) and condi-
tional (orange) speaker vector generation.
Consistent with the B3 system, we adopt the resynthesis
model of [4], performing feature-level anonymization (vs. neu-
ral codecs [12] and waveform manipulation [13]). Speech is de-
composed into content, prosody, and a speaker vector. The orig-
inal vector is replaced with a pseudo-speaker vector constrained
2https://github.com/katja-kolos/synthetic-speaker-vectors
5221
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1464
by cosine distance; content and prosody remain unchanged and
are resynthesized (Fig. 1). In the conditional setup, gender la-
bels from metadata guide speaker vector sampling.
Contributions.(1) We replace the Wasserstein GAN
with quadratic cost (WGAN-QC) generator with a diffusion-
based generator for speaker vector sampling. (2) We enable
attribute-controlled generation via (a) conditional WGAN-QC
(cWGAN-QC) and (b) diffusion classifier guidance, training
gender-conditional models and sampling from gender-specific
synthetic pools (labels from VPC metadata).
3. Synthesis of Speaker Embeddings
For the application in voice anonymization, the synthetic em-
bedding generator should satisfy four key constraints: (1) Dis-
tributional similarity to natural vectors is required for TTS com-
patibility and low WER. (2) Originality needs to be enforced so
that the model does not simply “copy” training identities. (3)
Diversity in the generated pool is preferred to support multi-
speaker scenarios and avoid unnatural repetition. (4) For con-
ditional generation, the embeddings must reliably represent the
target attribute (e.g., gender).
3.1. Synthesis of Speaker Vectors with WGAN-QC
The distribution of natural speaker embeddings has specific ge-
ometric structure that a synthetic distribution should match. In
optimal transport (OT) theory, there are generally many pos-
sible ways to map one continuous distribution to another, and
at least one optimal transport plan minimizes the total trans-
port cost [14]. In GANs, the generator aims to reduce a di-
vergence between the real and synthetic distributions. Ar-
jovsky et al. [15] showed that the Earth Mover’s (Wasserstein-
1) distance provides more stable and meaningful gradients
than the Jensen–Shannon divergence used in the original GAN
formulation [16]. Using the Kantorovich dual formulation,
the Wasserstein-1 distance can be computed via a single 1-
Lipschitz function, which is approximated by the discriminator
in WGAN. In contrast, approaches based on the quadratic-cost
Wasserstein-2 distance (e.g., [17]) generally require approxi-
mating the transport plan more explicitly, relying on optimal
transport solvers, which are typically implemented using linear
programming (LP) in the discrete case3.
3.1.1. Unconditional Generation with WGAN-QC
As a baseline for unconditional generation of speaker embed-
dings, we reproduce the WGAN-QC approach successfully
demonstrated in [18]. For this, we rely on the B3 baseline code
published in the repository of the VPC 2024 4 with explicit OT
approximation and linear programming.
3.1.2. Conditional Generation with cWGAN-QC
To perform label-informed synthesis, conditional WGAN-QC
(cWGAN-QC) extends WGAN-QC by injecting label embed-
dings into both the generator and critic, as proposed in [10]. The
key modification as opposed to unconditional version is solving
quadratic-cost optimal transport class-wise instead of globally,
3In theory, the distribution of utterance-level speaker embeddings is
continuous. However, in practice we only observe a finite sample of
embeddings, so optimal transport is computed here between empirical
(discrete) distributions. This is exactly the setting where linear pro-
gramming–based OT solvers apply.
4https://github.com/V oice-Privacy-Challenge
with separate LP-based dual potential regression per label to
ensure label-consistent training.
3.2. Synthesis of Speaker Vectors with Denoising Diffusion
We explore swapping WGANs for diffusion models to syn-
thesize new speaker embeddings. While this trades sampling
speed for quality and diversity, reflecting the generative learn-
ing trilemma [19], this cost is mitigated by our low-dimensional
data. Diffusion models [20] generate data by learning to reverse
a gradual noising process. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models (DDPMs) [21] formulate this by training a neural net-
work to predict thenoiseϵadded at each timestept. Genera-
tion starts from random noise and iteratively denoises it to ob-
tain a realistic sample (here, a speaker embedding). Denoising
Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIMs) [22] generalize DDPMs
via non-Markovian sampling, accelerating inference with fewer
timesteps while preserving the training objective and quality.
3.2.1. Unconditional Generation with Denoising Diffusion
For unconditional generation of speaker embeddings, we fol-
low the implementation of [6]. The denoising network architec-
ture and timestep embedding design are inspired by [23]. Con-
cretely, the model is a timestep-conditioned residual multi-layer
perceptron (MLP): it takes a noisy speaker embedding and a si-
nusoidal timestep embedding as input, processes them through
stacked residual blocks, and predicts the added noise. Training
minimizes the mean squared error between the true and pre-
dicted noise. For sampling, we use a DDIM scheduler [22]
implemented in thediffuserslibrary [24], enabling faster
generation of plausible synthetic speaker embeddings.
3.2.2. Conditional Generation with Denoising Diffusion and
Classifier Guidance
We train a lightweight noise-robust classifier consisting of a 2-
layer MLP with dropout and 1-layer MLP for time embedding
to predict gender given a speaker vector and a timestept. The
classifier is trained on noisy embeddings using the same noise
scheduler and time encoding function as the diffusion model,
with cross-entropy loss. During sampling, we employ classi-
fier guidance following theϵ-prediction formulation described
in [11]. Specifically, we modify the predicted noiseϵθ(xt,t)by
subtracting the classifier gradient∇ xt logpϕ(y|xt), scaled by
the cumulative noise factor
p
(1−¯αt)and a hyperparameter
guidance scales. This guided noiseˆϵis then used to compute
the subsequent latentxt−1 viadiffusers.
4. Experimental Setup
4.1. Data
Table 1:Summary of datasets used for speaker vector synthesis
and classifier training.
Original Synthesis Classifiers
CorpusUtt(Spk)Utt(Spk)Utt(Spk)
LibriTTS 375,086 (2,456) 4,490 (1,120) 149,736 (1,151)
ESD (en) 17,480 (10) 40 (10) –
RA VDESS 1,440 (24) 96 (24) –
Our models operate on utterance-level speaker embeddings
based on Global Style Tokens (GST) [25] . In our implementa-
5222
tion, these are 128-dimensional vectors representing a weighted
average of style tokens. Following the approach of [7] for more
versatile data, we train the generative models on a diverse pool
of natural speaker embeddings from three corpora, as shown
in 1. FromLibriTTS[26], we sampled four random utterances
per speaker from thetrain-cleanpartitions. We excluded
31 speakers with fewer than four utterances. Crucially, Lib-
riTTS test and development partitions were withheld from all
training stages, as they overlap with the VPC evaluation suite
used in our final downstream experiments. For more diver-
sity, we further included four utterances (angry, sad, happy,
and neutral) per speaker from both the English subset of the
Emotional Speech Dataset(ESD) [27] and the speech subset
of theRyerson Audio-Visual Database of Emotional Speech
and Song(RA VDESS) [28]. We used the combined LibriTTS
train-clean-100and360(1,151 speakers; 149,736 utter-
ances) to train two gender classifiers: one for evaluating condi-
tioning and a noise-robust version for classifier guidance. Eval-
uation of the anonymization framework is conducted using the
standard VPC suite (IEMOCAP [29] and LibriSpeech [30]).
4.2. Configuration
The unconditionalWGAN-QCwas trained for 2000 cycles (1
epoch/cycle) with a learning rate (LR) of10 −5, Adam opti-
mizer,β= (0.5,0.999), and batch size 128 to ensure a robust
optimal transport (OT) approximation. We applied data normal-
ization during training and inverse normalization during sam-
pling. The conditional variant (cWGAN-QC) used 200 cycles
(10 epochs/cycle), LR10 −6,β= (0.7,0.9), and batch size 64.
For both, we setzdim = 16,γ= 1, and utilized ResNet architec-
tures (size= 8unconditional,16conditional) with a maximum
of 16 filters. The unconditionalDiffusionused 4 ResNet blocks
and a DDIM scheduler, trained for 20 cycles (10 epochs/cycle)
with LR10 −5 and batch size 16. We used 2000 training and
1500 sampling timesteps. For conditional generation viaclas-
sifier guidance, we applied scales of 0.22 and 0.72 for male
and female targets, respectively. Our vectors are integrated into
the resynthesis pipeline of [5], extended with prosody cloning
[9]. The system uses ESPNet2 [31] for ASR, FastPitch [32]
with GSTs [25] for speaker embeddings, FastSpeech2 [33], and
Avocodo [34] via IMS Toucan [35] v2.5 with GST vectors.
4.3. Voice Anonymization Evaluation
To assess voice anonymization using generated speaker vectors,
we follow the evaluation framework of VPC 2024. Privacy is
quantified using theEqual Error Rate(EER) of an Automatic
Speaker Verification (ASV) attacker trained on anonymized
data (semi-informed condition). A higher EER indicates more
successful voice anonymization because the attacker fails to
map unseen trial speakers to known enrollment speakers. Util-
ity is measured viaWord Error Rate(WER) to verify the
preservation of linguistic content, alongside emotion preserva-
tion metrics (UAR). EER and WER are evaluated using the Lib-
riSpeech splits of the VPC, IEMOCAP is used for UAR.
4.4. Evaluation of Synthetic Vector Pools
4.4.1. Vector Pool Assessment
We test various configurations for generating the pools of syn-
thetic speaker vectors, integrating only the high-performing
configurations into the downstream TTS. Because subopti-
mal hyperparameter settings or architectural choices can yield
speaker vectors that produce corrupted waveforms character-
ized by nonsense syllables and noise, we develop a set of cus-
tom measures to filter out such vectors early on. These include:
an approximation of Wasserstein-2 (W2) distance implemented
with thePOTlibrary[36, 37] 5;Diversity: mean pairwise cosine
distance within the pool of synthetic vectors, which tests for
mode collapse (the one in the pool of natural vectors is≈0.93);
Copying Similarity: 1 - the average minimal pairwise cosine
distance between synthetic and natural speaker vectors, which
serves as a diagnostic for training data memorization.
4.4.2. Effect on Synthesis
To assess the pureTTS applicabilityof the embeddings without
confounding errors from the prosody cloning or ASR models,
we disable the extraction module and only input embeddings
and golden transcripts to the synthesis module to synthesize
Harvard sentence with generated embeddings 6 [38]. We re-
port the resulting word accuracy (wAcc):1−WER. This tiny
dataset is more challenging than LibriTTS as it contains phonet-
ically diverse sentences and homonyms (e.g.:’Glue the sheet to
the dark blue background’).
4.5. Attribute Control
We process the synthesized waveforms of the VPC data through
a robust pre-trained ECAPA-TDNN [39] gender classifier 7 to
confirm the acoustic realization of the intended gender. We also
evaluate the correspondence of generated speaker vectors to the
desired gender label with a classifier trained on natural data.
5. Results and Discussion
5.1. Voice Anonymization
Table 2 shows that our diffusion model achieves downstream
privacy and utility performance comparable to the original
WGAN-QC baseline, while our conditional setups, classifier
guidance and cWGAN, successfully introduce high-accuracy
attribute control without compromising these metrics.
5.1.1. Privacy and Utility
Speaker vectors generated unconditionally with diffusion, as
well as those generated conditionally with cWGAN-QC or with
classifier guidance, all show stable downstreamprivacyperfor-
mance within the STTTS pipeline: the EER scores of the semi-
informed ASV attacker are comparable to those of the baseline
B3 (WGAN-QC). At the same time, all our vectors show better
privacy metrics on female speakers and worse on male speakers.
Word error rate scores on LibriSpeech (test) and UAR scores
in emotion recognition demonstrate that our new synthetic em-
beddings do not affect the overallutilityof STTTS pipeline sig-
nificantly, while the conditional WGAN-QC even slightly out-
performs the unconditional version (despite the baseline being
trained on a larger dataset).
5.1.2. Attribute Control
We report for comparison the performance of our approaches on
the trials (female and male subsets separately) of LibriSpeech
test.Unconditionalgeneration of vectors randomly selects a
vector ignoring the gender attribute of the original speech, re-
sulting in 38.7% accuracy for male speakers in diffusion, show-
5https://pythonot.github.io
6https://www.cs.columbia.edu/∼hgs/audio/harvard.html
7https://huggingface.co/JaesungHuh/voice-gender-classifier
5223
Table 2:Voice anonymization results on LibriSpeech (EER, WER) and IEMOCAP (UAR). Gender Accuracy of synthesized audios is
reported on both for female (f) and male (m) conditioning targets.
EER [%]↑WER [%]↓UAR [%]↑Gender Acc.↑
Model Conditionalf m all Total f m
WGAN-QC (B3) No 27.92 26.72 4.35 37.57 50.95 36.35
WGAN-QC No 27.74 25.85 4.17 36.15 45.36 53.02
Diffusion No 27.96 26.01 4.24 35.95 67.30 38.71
cWGAN-QC Yes 28.29 26.10 4.22 38.28 99.86 100.00
Diffusion+CG Yes 30.11 25.17 4.42 37.28 99.59 90.68
B3
our 
WGAN
our
diffusion
Figure 2:Multi-objective comparison of synthetic speaker vec-
tor pools. Star marks the optimum.
ing the model’s bias towards female speakers (67.3% accuracy).
Bothconditionalapproaches, cWGAN-QC and classifier guid-
ance, obtain almost perfect attribute control on female speakers.
At the same time, while classifier guidance has an accuracy of
90.7% for male speakers, cWGAN-QC obtains perfect perfor-
mance on this split. Our vector-based gender classifier reports
male label in 79.9% and female label in 99.6% of the vectors
synthesized with classifier guidance and respective label, and
perfect scores for cWGAN-QC (both male and female). We
opted for a stronger guidance scale for female speakers (0.72 vs
0.22), which explains better accuracy for female label.
5.2. Experiments with Synthesis of Speaker Vectors
The exact WGAN and diffusion configurations for the voice
anonymization pipeline were selected as a result of independent
assessment of the distribution of synthetic vectors and of the
TTS integration, free from ASR and prosody artifacts. We also
compare all tested configurations to a pool ofnaturalembed-
dings, and arandombaseline: 128-dimensional vectors from
a uniform distributionU(−0.5,0,5), matching the empirical
value range observed in natural GST embeddings.
As illustrated in Figure 2, there is a distinct trade-off be-
tween the synthetic pool’s diversity, originality, and utility. The
natural baseline (diamond) serves as the performance anchor,
demonstrating high word accuracy and optimal naturalness; its
Copying Similarity to the closest natural vector is trivially 1.0.
The anchor on the opposite side is a pool of randomly sam-
pled speaker vectors, which perform significantly worse when
plugged into TTS with a word accuracy of 87.5%. These em-
beddings understandably have high originality: obtaining ran-
domly a close copy of a voice from the training data is unex-
pected. The configurations of diffusion (circles) and WGAN
(squares) lie somewhere in-between. Diffusion-based synthetic
pools demonstrate superior originality, consistently maintain-
ing lower Copying Similarity compared to their WGAN coun-
terparts. While this indicates a more robust generation process
that avoids memorization, it comes at the cost of naturalness,
as seen in the lighter green and yellow hues representing higher
W2 distances, which also correlates with worse wAcc. WGAN
generations generally achieve higher naturalness, reflected by
darker purple hues (lowerW 2 values). LowerW 2 also corre-
lates with better wAcc, as expected: the speech synthesis sys-
tem was trained on a specific distribution of natural speaker em-
beddings, and closer alignment with this distribution improves
downstream synthesis quality. At the same time, several well-
converged WGAN configurations exhibit high Copying Simi-
larity, suggesting a risk to reproduce training samples rather
than drawing new original vectors from the distribution. Op-
timizing for better originality can lead to worseW 2 values.
The optimal synthetic pool is characterized by a balance of
low WER, high diversity (large bubble size), and low Copying
Similarity without sacrificingW 2 distance. One WGAN-QC
setup is very close, but only generates male speakers. For our
voice privacy framework, we select anotherWGANfor uncon-
ditional generation, with balanced gender and slightly betterW2
(highlighted with a bright border in the picture). The selected
unconditionaldiffusionis the one that achieves best WER on
Harvard Sentences and has goodW 2 measures, average copy-
ing similarity and good diversity; this model is also used for
classifier guidance in conditional generation.
Experiments with theguidance scaleslead us to select
0.72 for female and 0.22 for male speakers. Increasingsfor
male speakers triggers a sharp performance trade-off (3.12to
8.37WER for 79.9% to 99.8% attribute accuracy). Conversely,
largersimproves performance for female speakers, where all
variants (2.06to2.62WER) actually surpass the cWGAN-
QC baseline. cWGAN-QC remains a robust foundation for the
anonymizaiton pipeline with WER of2.53for female and2.68
for male speakers, and 100.0% accuracy in attribute control.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose novel methods for synthetic speaker
vector generation and gender control for voice anonymization.
While both WGAN and diffusion models produce high-utility
embeddings, diffusion with classifier guidance offers a flexible
mechanism that theoretically scales to new attributes via stan-
dalone classifiers; cWGAN, on the other hand, shows superior
performance in our gender-controlled tests. In future work, we
plan to empirically extend this to multilabel and multiclass con-
trol of diverse speaker attributes.
5224
7. Acknowledgments
This work is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – Project: Mul-
tilingual Controllable V oice Privacy (V oiPy) - Project number
533241795.
8. Generative AI Use Disclosure
During the preparation of this work, the authors utilized Chat-
GPT (versions 4o and 5.2) and Gemini 3 Flash as assistive tools.
These models were used for preliminary literature screening,
conceptual brainstorming, and manusc