Automatic generation of audio comic from manga images
Sota Koshino ID 1, Shotaro Ueji ID 1, Shinnosuke Takamichi ID 1,2, Tomohiko Nakamura ID 2
1 Keio University, Japan
2 National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan
stay1362@keio.jp, shinnosuke takamichi@keio.jp
Abstract
An audio comic is a derivative work based on manga aug-
mented with voice acting. Our system provides a function that
(semi-)automatically generates audio comics from manga im-
ages. In this paper, we report on the processing pipeline of the
system and the objective and subjective evaluation results of the
generated audio comics.
Index Terms: audio comic, Prompt-based TTS
1. Introduction
An audio comic is a derivative work based on manga augmented
with acted speech that reflects the content of the original story,
as illustrated in Figure 1. By adding expressive voices to manga
characters, audio comics can provide a more immersive reading
experience. The large manga market and the growing global
audiobook market suggest their industrial potential.
In this paper, we propose a pilot automatic system for gen-
erating audio comics from manga images, where the input is
a manga image and the output is a synthesized speech corre-
sponding to the content and sequence of the manga. Realizing
such a system is expected to reduce the cost of producing audio
comics, thereby enabling more manga titles to be adapted into
audio comics and improving accessibility to manga for people
with visual impairments through auditory presentation.
Those who participate in our demo will be able to experi-
ence the on-site generation of synthesized speech from Japanese
manga images.
2. System architecture
Our system architecture is shown in Figure 2.
2.1. Detection & understanding
Before inference, we store name–face image pairs for each char-
acter for alignment. Given an input manga image, the system
first detects panels, text regions, and character regions, and per-
forms text recognition on the detected text regions. It then es-
timates the reading order, recognizes each character by match-
ing detected faces against prepared reference face images and
names, and associates each line with its speaker. This produces
an XML file per image, describing each line’s text, speaker, and
reading order.
To control speaking style, we compose prompts from a
character name and a categorical emotion. A vision-language
model (VLM) predicts one of eight emotions—calm, neutral,
happy, surprised, angry, fearful, sad, or disgust—for each line
from its text, surrounding lines, the character’s face image, and
the corresponding panel image. The final prompt is as follows:
“Character Name’s voice isEmotionwith very clear au-
dio.”
Love Hina@Ken Akamatsu from Manga109
Mitsune Keitaro
 Mitsune
 Keitaro
Figure 1:Our concept. Generating an audio comic from manga
image.
Line 
text 
: ”仇討ち！~”
  ”何すんだ~”
: ”待てコラ”
Face
ImageContext
Panel
Image
: 
: 
Touma
Sakisuke
VLM
(Estimate emotion 
& Make prompt)
<
  <text_1, prompt>
  <text_2, prompt>
    :
    :
  <text_n, prompt>
>
Script XML
Prompt TTS
(Training & 
Inference)
Synthesized 
Speech
1.Detection 2.Understanding
・Panel
・Text
・Character
・Identification
・Text Ordering
・Text RecognitionPage Image
3.Synthesis
AkkeraKanjinchou @ Yuki Kobayashi from Manga109
Figure 2:Overview of the system architecture.
2.2. Speech synthesis
Prompt-based text-to-speech (TTS) is utilized to synthesize ex-
pressive speech from each text line. A text line and style prompt
(mentioned above) are fed into a prompt-based TTS model. To
synthesize audio comic-style speech, the model is trained in
advance on an audio comic dataset with rich annotation (i.e.,
ground-truth text line, etc).
3. Experimental evaluation
3.1. System setup
We prepared two variants for detection and understanding: v1
(Magiv2 [1] + Yomitoku1) and v2 (Magiv3 [2] + MangaOCR2).
We used ParlerTTS [3], which was fine-tuned for Japanese on
1https://github.com/kotaro-kinoshita/yomitoku
2https://github.com/kha-white/manga-ocr
870
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia

v1 v20.0
0.5
1.01 - Recall
Panel
detection
v1 v20.0
0.5
1.01 - Recall
T ext
detection
v1 v20.0
0.5
1.01 - Recall
Character
detection
v1 v20.0
0.5
1.01 - Accuracy
Character
identification
v1 v20.0
0.5
1.01 - Accuracy
Speaker
identification
v1 v20.0
0.5
1.0TOER
T ext order
error rate
v1 v20.0
0.5
1.0CER
T ext
recognition
Figure 3:Objective evaluation results of the proposed system.
our MangaV ox dataset [4], containing approximately9hours of
human-acted speech data. We used GPT-5.23as the VLM.
3.2. Objective evaluation
We compared the performance of the v1 and v2 systems on the
following manga detection and understanding tasks.
•Panel detection (image)(1 - Recall): Intersection-over-
union (IoU)-based detection error of panel regions [5].
•Text detection (image)(1 - Recall): IoU-based detection er-
ror of text regions.
•Character detection (image)(1 - Recall): IoU-based detec-
tion error of character faces.
•Character identification (image)(1 - Accuracy): Error in
identifying a name of the detected character.
•Text ordering (text)(text order error rate): Error rate based
on the reading order of text regions.
•Text recognition (text)(CER): Character error rate in recog-
nized text.
•Speaker identification (text)(1 - Accuracy): Error in asso-
ciating text with corresponding characters.
Their ground-truth annotations were obtained from
Manga109 [6, 7] and MangaV ox. The test set consisted of ap-
proximately700pages from8manga titles, of various genres.
As shown in Figure 3, the v2 system outperformed the v1
system on all tasks. The improvements were especially large
in text-related tasks, including text order estimation and text
recognition. Based on these results, we adopted the v2 system
in the proposed system.
3.3. Subjective evaluation
We used80% of Manga109 data for training. The test set
comprised five unseen pages per title, each containing all ma-
jor characters, totalling 40 pages. We used crowdsourcing and
hired150participants to evaluate three types of speech on over-
all impression as audio comics on a five-point Likert scale. The
question presented to the participants was, “What is your over-
all impression?” We compared the following three conditions:
•v2 + TTS: pipeline of the v2 system and TTS.
•manual + TTS: Manually annotated XML and TTS. This is
a semi-automatic system in which human creators have cor-
rected errors in detection and understanding.
•GT: Human-acted voices in MangaV ox.
Each participant evaluated seven panels, resulting in21
speech samples in total.
3https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/
models/gpt-5.2
v2+TTS manual+TTS GT0
1
2
3
4
5MOS
Overall MOS
Figure 4:Subjective evaluation results of three conditions.
The results are shown in Figure 4. In the subjective eval-
uation of overall audio comic quality,GTachieved a score of
approximately4.0, whereas bothv2 + TTSandmanual + TTS
were rated around2.5.
These results show our automatic system (v2 + TTS) can
generate audio comics with a certain level of subjective qual-
ity.They also show its quality is comparable to that of the semi-
automatic system (manual + TTS),suggesting that the auto-
matic detection and understanding pipeline is effective for au-
dio comic generation.Although a gap remains between the TTS-
based conditions andGT,further improvements in TTS are ex-
pected to enhance the overall quality of generated audio comics.
4. Conclusion
We developed an automatic generation systems of audio comics
from manga images. Future work will explore better prompt de-
sign and character voice synthesis methods.Acknowledgment.
This paper is supported by the AIST policy-budget project ”Research
and Development of Generative AI Foundation Models for the Physi-
cal Domain,” JSPS KAKENHI 23K28108, and JST FOREST Program
Grant Number JPMJFR226V .
5. Use of generative AI disclosure
ChatGPT was used for proofreading and editing the manuscript.