Calibration-Reasoning Framework for Descriptive Speech Quality Assessment
Elizaveta Kostenok1,2, Mathieu Salzmann ID 1, Milos Cernak ID 2
1 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
2 Logitech, Lausanne, Switzerland
lisakostenok@gmail.com, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch, mcernak@logitech.com
Abstract
Explainable speech quality assessment requires moving beyond
Mean Opinion Scores (MOS) to analyze underlying perceptual
dimensions. To address this, we introduce a novel post-training
method that tailors the foundational Audio Large Language
Model for multidimensional reasoning, detection and classifi-
cation of audio artifacts. First, a calibration stage aligns the
model to predict predefined perceptual dimensions. Second, a
reinforcement learning stage leverages Group Relative Policy
Optimization (GRPO) with dimension-specific rewards to heav-
ily enhance accuracy of descriptions and temporal localization
of quality issues. With this approach we reach state-of-the-art
results of0.71mean PCC score on the multidimensional Qual-
iSpeech benchmark and13%improvement in MOS prediction
driven by RL-based reasoning. Furthermore, our fine-grained
GRPO rewards substantially advance the model’s ability to pin-
point and classify audio artifacts in time.
Index Terms: descriptive speech quality assessment, audio
LLMs, post-training
1. Introduction
Non-intrusive speech quality assessment methods mainly tar-
get MOS score, as closest measure of human perception.
While deep learning models approximate it with high accu-
racy [1, 2, 3], their ”black-box” predictions lack interpretabil-
ity. Efforts to bridge this gap decompose quality into perceptual
dimensions like intelligibility and naturalness [4, 5, 6, 7]. Al-
though these approaches offer a more nuanced perspective, they
are restricted to quantitative assessment; they can neither char-
acterize the specific types of audio artifacts nor localize them
within the audio recording.
Audio Large Language Models (Audio LLMs) have re-
cently shifted the field toward Explainable MOS – generating
descriptive assessments to interpret these scores [8, 9, 10, 11].
Beyond outputting verifiable numerical values, these models
can leverage natural language reasoning to classify artifacts and
localize them in time. However, current Explainable MOS sys-
tems prioritize conversational fluency over diagnostic precision.
Because the descriptive quality assessment task is absent from
their pre-training mixtures, their reasoning is often ungrounded;
their MOS prediction accuracy typically falls short of traditional
score-based methods due to interference from hallucinated or
incorrect dimension-wise predictions. To serve as a reliable di-
agnostic tool rather than a general audio quality summarization,
these models require targeted alignment that strictly enforces
both dimensional and temporal accuracy.
To bridge this gap, we introduce a two-stage post-
training methodology comprising a Calibration stage to learn
dimension-wise scales, and a Reasoning stage implemented
via GRPO [12] with fine-grained, dimension-specific rewards.
When applied to the Audio Flamingo 3 model [13], Calibration-
Reasoning framework 1 sets a new state-of-the-art on Qual-
iSpeech [8] benchmark, outperforming existing baselines in
dimension-wise judgments and the temporal localization of au-
dio artifacts.
2. Related Work
Current approaches to descriptive speech quality assessment
generally rely on coupling a pretrained audio encoder for fea-
ture extraction with an LLM for text generation, followed
by fine-tuning on dimension-specific annotations. Authors
of QualiSpeech [8] describe a two-stage pipeline (hereafter,
QualiSpeech-FT) with Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) in both
stages, learning dimension-wise scores followed by long-form
descriptions. While the classification and detection of audio
artifacts improve after the second stage, dimension-wise score
prediction slightly degrades. The authors cite the limited rea-
soning capacity of the Vicuna [14] LLM backbone as a poten-
tial bottleneck in their multimodal system, as it is outperformed
by GPT-4o-mini [15] in deriving MOS from dimension-wise
scores. Another method, SpeechQualityLLM [9], jointly fine-
tunes audio encoder with LLM decoder on NISQA [4] dataset
to predict MOS and dimension-wise scores with justification in
natural language. It focuses primarily on evaluations of scores,
considering generated descriptions as supplementary and leav-
ing the quality of the textual reasoning unassessed.
To improve reasoning relative to SFT, more recent ap-
proaches integrate Reinforcement Learning (RL) into the train-
ing pipeline. The ALLD framework [10] utilizes Direct Pref-
erence Optimization (DPO)-style [16] reward, while also in-
creasing the alignment between Audio LLM and expert text-
only LLM outputs via token-level distillation. SQ-LLM [11]
applies RL after SFT on long-form descriptions, using GRPO
to optimize broad, response-level rewards (e.g.,Helpfulness,
Accuracy). While standard for text reasoning, this unified re-
ward structure does not explicitly isolate feedback for individ-
ual speech quality dimensions.
To address these limitations, our proposed method explic-
itly optimizes the model using reward signals tied directly to
individual quality dimensions. Furthermore, to prevent the rea-
soning bottlenecks observed in prior work, we build our frame-
work upon a state-of-the-art Audio LLM in the 7–8 billion pa-
rameter range.
1Sample assessments are available athttps:
//calibrationreasoningframework.github.
io/audiollmdemo/, the source code is avail-
able athttps://github.com/KostenokLisa/
calibration-reasoning-framework
169
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2362
SFT — Supervised Fine-tuning
GRPO — Group Relative Policy
Optimization
ri
J  — reward for i-th output in the group 
evaluated on the quality dimension J
KL — Kullback-Leibler Divergence
Audio
Enc. Adapt. LLM
Dimension-wise scores
     / Rate the distortion    
   / Rate the continuity  
    / Rate the intelligibility
      / Rate the quality(MOS)
   / Rate the noise level
Brief descriptions
   / Analyse the noise   
     / Analyse the distortion   
   / Analyse the pauses
SFT
 3: Noticeable 
 4: Slightly distorted
 2: Fairly disjointed
 2: Considerable effort 
 2: Fairly unnatural 
 2: Poor
 Baby crying, 0-3.3s 
 Mechanical sound, 2.5-3s 
 2.2-2.5s 
Long-form descriptions
       / Provide an overall
assessment of the speech
quality based on quality
factors: noise, <...>
GRPO  Outdoor sounds, including a
baby crying, are noticeable from
0 to 3.3 s <...> consequently,
the overall quality remains poor.
     
 Input
       
 o1
 o2
 o3
     
     
r1
N
KL
Groupwise Norm.
     
     
r1
D
     
     
r1
C
     
     
r1
I
     
     
r1
Na
     
     
r1
Q
     / Rate the naturalness
     
     
r2
N
     
     
r2
D
     
     
r2
C
     
     
r2
I
     
     
r2
Na
     
     
r2
Q
    
r3
N
     
     
r3
D
     
     
r3
C
     
     
r3
I
     
     
r3
Na
     
     
r3
Q
 
r4
N
     
  
r4
D
     
     
r4
C
     
     
r4
I
     
     
r4
Na
     
     
r4
Q o4
Dimension-wise rewards
1. Calibration 
2. Reasoning
Audio
Flamingo 3
Instruction: Rate the
speech quality on a
scale from 1 to 5
30s 
16 kHz mono
128-channel mel-
spectrogram
window size 25 ms
hop size of 10 ms
     Fine-tuned Policy Model
     Frozen Reference Model 
Figure 1:Overview of end-to-end fine-tuning pipeline.
3. Method
Our approach is illustrated in Figure 1. It consists of two stages:
Calibration and Reasoning, which we describe below.
3.1. Calibration
First, we fine-tune model for muldimensional judgments using
supervised fine-tuning. For each aspect, model learns quality
scores on a scale [1, 5], where higher score corresponds to
the higher quality, provided with criteria for each score in the
prompt. It optimizes the likelihood of ground truth answers with
Cross-Entropy loss:
LSFT (θ) =−
TX
t=1
logpθ(yt|y<t,Emb[S,x prompt]))(1)
wherey t,t∈[1,T]are answer tokens,Emb[S,x prompt]are
bi-modal embeddings of speech and instruction.
The goal of this phase is twofold: to inject quality-
discriminative features into the audio encoder’s latent space,
and to equip the LLM to interpret these signals with high fi-
delity. While prior work [8, 11] freezes audio encoder during
post-training, the core part of our calibration stage is making
audio encoder trainable to increase its sensitivity to low-level
speech features.
3.2. Reasoning
Second, we fine-tune the calibration checkpoint to aggregate
dimension-wise predictions and reason about the overall quality
using GRPO algorithm. Its work principle is to collect data, up-
date the policy, and then immediately uses that updated policy
to collect better data. In the context of text generation, policy
refers to output distribution of the model over vocabulary to-
kensp θ, data refers to the batch of multimodal inputs - speech
recordings with instructions. For a given inputx, the model
samples a group ofGcandidate responses, each of which is
scored by a customized reward mechanism. The comparison
between rewards within a group is used as training signal:
ˆAi = R(yi)− ¯Rgroup
σgroup
(2)
where sign and magnitude of advantages ˆAi fori-th response
serve as the measure of its relative quality. The model weights
are then updated to increase probability of above-average out-
puts and decrease the probability of below-average ones. The
loss is regularized by a Kullback-Leibler divergence penalty be-
tween output distributions of policy modelp θ and the frozen
reference modelpref to prevent reward hacking:
LGRPO (θ) =−E i
h
logpθ(yi|x) ˆAi
i
+λKL(p ref∥p θ)(3)
3.2.1. Dimension-wise rewards
GRPO’s effectiveness relies on bounded reward functions that
evaluate candidate relevance. We design our rewards around
verifiable anchors extracted from the generated text: numerical
quality scores and brief artifact descriptions.
First approach relies on structured quality descriptions: we
extract dimension-wise scores to estimateAccuracyreward:
rScore
i =1[s pred =s ref](4)
For audio artifacts annotated with brief descriptions we cal-
culateSemantic Similaritybetweeny pred and the referencey ref
by computing the cosine similarity between embeddingsegen-
erated by the sentence transformer model and mapped linearly
to[0,1]:
rSemantic
i = 1
2
 epred·e ref
∥epred∥∥eref∥ + 1

(5)
By combining these, we balance strict factual precision
with broader contextual meaning. The total rewardRis the
sum of accuracy and semantic reward across all dimensions.
Second approach is to use a separate text-only LLM for
multidimensional scoring. We prompt it to evaluate each gener-
ation as shown on the Figure 2. We estimate the total rewardR
as the sum of dimension-wise rewards.
4. Experimental setup
4.1. Data
We use QualiSpeech corpus for training and evaluation, as
it contains both quantitative and qualitative characteristics for
170
Table 1:Pearson Correlation Coefficients (PCC) for dimension-wise speech quality assessment across various reasoning strategies.
The ’Nat. ’ to ’MOS’ columns represent specific perceptual dimensions from the QualiSpeech dataset, ’Avg. ’ refers to the mean of the
dimension-wise PCC values.
Reasoning method Learned Enc. Calibration Nat. Noise Distort. Effort Cont. MOS Avg.
Baselines
QualiSpeech-FT-SALMONN x✓0.56 0.65 0.57 0.61 0.45 0.63 0.57
QualiSpeech-FT x✓0.61 0.68 0.58 0.60 0.49 0.64 0.60
SQ-LLM✓ ✓0.71 0.72 0.60 0.65 0.44 0.68 0.63
Ours
Acc.+Sem. dim.-wise✓ ✓0.700.780.590.690.55 0.72 0.68
LLM-judge dim.-wise✓ ✓0.730.77 0.68 0.670.63 0.76 0.71
Ablations
QualiSpeech-FT✓ ✓0.68 0.75 0.61 0.66 0.59 0.67 0.69
QualiSpeech-FT✓x 0.55 0.48 0.59 0.50 0.35 0.60 0.51
x (Calibration-only)✓ ✓0.67 0.750.690.61 0.55 0.71 0.66
The speech sample exhibits minimal background noise, making 
it easy to focus on the content. However, there is a slight pitch 
distortion present, particularly noticeable from 0 to 3.4 seconds, 
which introduces an intermittent electric current quality. <...> 
Overall, the quality of the speech is good, reflecting a well-
executed delivery despite minor imperfections.
The speech sample presents a very favorable background 
noise level, with no noticeable interference. However, there is 
some pitch distortion present, particularly from 0 to 4 seconds, 
which introduces a mechanical quality <...> Overall, while the 
speech quality is fair due to the distortion and unnaturalness, 
the clarity and smoothness enhance the listening experience, 
resulting in a balanced evaluation.
Reference assessment 
Generated assessment
LLM-judge Reward
Exact Align: 1.0
Minor Mismatch: 0.5-0.9
Major Error: < 0.5
Not Related: 0.0
Formula:
Overlap / Union Duration
Edge cases: 
e.g. [0-0] conditions
Noise
Minimal background
noise
Very favourable level, no
noticeable interference
Distortion times
0-3.4 s
0-4 s
[6 in total] 
[3 in total] 
0.85 
0.8 
Dimension-wise
descriptions
Time interval overlap
Figure 2:Dimension-wise LLM-judge reward.
core perceptual dimensions. It spans 12,450 speech recordings
with detailed annotations (85% / 15% train/test split). Listen-
ers ratings on a scale [1, 5] are provided for seven perceptual
dimensions:speed 2, noise, distortion, naturalness, listening ef-
fort, continuity, overall quality (MOS). Time intervals and brief
descriptions are provided for audio artifacts:noise, distortions,
unnatural pauses. Finally, all quality factors are summarized in
a long natural language description.
4.2. Models
We adopt Audio Flamingo 3 model because of its state-of-the-
art performance on advanced audio perception and reasoning
benchmark MMAU [17] among open-weight models of similar
size. We also fine-tune SALMONN-7B [18] model to reproduce
the results from QualiSpeech paper.
4.3. Baselines and Alignment Methodologies
We frame the explanation of MOS as a reasoning task and cate-
gorize alignment methodologies based on their approach to rea-
soning: SFT or RL. We select QualiSpeech-FT and SQ-LLM as
baselines because their fine-tuning curricula are comparable to
our Calibration-Reasoning framework.
In the SFT-based methodologies, the second (Reasoning)
2Predictions for this aspect are intentionally excluded from the eval-
uation due to highly imbalanced data
Table 2:Hyperparameter configurations across different fine-
tuning stages. ’Gr.s. ’, ’B.s. ’, ’L.r. ’ refer to group size in GRPO,
batch size and learning rate.
FT Stage N iter. Gr. s. B.s. L.r.
Calibration 10k – 8 1.5e-5
SFT Reasoning 10k – 8 1.5e-5
GRPO Reasoning 200 4 4 5e-6
stage is chain-of-thought fine-tuning on long-form descriptions.
We reproduce QualiSpeech-FT with AF3 base model to evalu-
ate the impact of more capable LLM backbone. We addition-
ally compare frozen and end-to-end learned audio encoders and
single-stage pipelines as an ablation study.
For our RL-based approaches, we apply GRPO after a sin-
gle epoch of supervised fine-tuning (SFT) warm-up on long-
form descriptions to stabilize the model’s adherence to the
expected response structure. We distinguish our fine-grained
pipeline from the SQ-LLM baseline by shifting from aunified
preference strategy, which evaluates broad properties such as
”Helpfulness, ” ”Relevance, ” ”Detail, ” and ”Accuracy”across
all dimensions simultaneously, to adimension-wisestrategy. In
our approach, rewards are explicitly mapped to individual Qual-
iSpeech quality dimensions. Following the SQ-LLM setup, we
utilize Qwen3 [19] as theLLM-judge. Furthermore, to inves-
tigate the role of dimension-specific optimization, we imple-
ment an alternative GRPO configuration driven byAccuracy
andSemantic Similarityrewards. These rewards are computed
from the parsed components of structured responses, providing
a more interpretable and computationally efficient alternative to
the LLM-judge. Semantic similarity embeddings are generated
using the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model [20].
We summarize the training configurations in Table 2. All
models were trained with early stopping and used Low-Rank
Adaptation [21] with rank 64. Training utilized two NVIDIA
L40S GPUS with 96 GB total VRAM, 8 vCPUs.
5. Results
To evaluate quality of explanations, we adopt testing approach
from QualiSpeech paper: we prompt GPT-4o [22] to extract
verifyable signals, such as scores, brief descriptions and time
intervals from the generated text.
171
Table 3:Descriptive accuracy of various reasoning strategies. We report F1 score for artifact detection, Correlation score (Corr.)
estimated by GPT-4o for artifact descriptions, and Intersection over Union (IoU) for overlap between detected and reference time
intervals; ROUGE-L and Correlation score for long-form descriptions.
Reasoning method
Brief desc. Long-form desc.
Noise Distortion Unnatural Pause ROUGE-L Corr.
F1 Corr. IoU F1 Corr. IoU F1 Corr. IoU
Baselines
QualiSpeech-FT-SALMONN 0.44 0.49 0.49 0.49 0.67 0.78 0.53 0.40 0.34 0.38 0.75
QualiSpeech-FT 0.56 0.52 0.44 0.73 0.71 0.81 0.56 0.40 0.25 0.40 0.78
SQ-LLM 0.72 0.57 0.56 0.82 0.68 0.74 0.61 0.39 0.33 0.45 0.82
Ours
Acc.+Sem. dim.-wise0.770.68 0.61 0.63 0.70 0.80 0.54 0.42 0.46 0.47 0.80
LLM-judge dim.-wise0.770.750.720.84 0.850.84 0.67 0.44 0.47 0.51 0.83
Ablation
x (Calibration-only) 0.750.850.670.88 0.900.81 0.560.440.45 0.12 0.19
Table 1 presents the dimension-wise evaluation scores,
placing special emphasis on MOS prediction, as it is derived
from the quality dimensions. Our LLM-judge with dimension-
wise rewards method demonstrates the strongest overall perfor-
mance, surpassing previous state-of-the-art methods to achieve
the highest average Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) of
0.71 and a MOS PCC of 0.76. Among the RL-based ap-
proaches, both of our dimension-wise reward strategies strictly
outperform the unified reward baseline (SQ-LLM) across MOS
and average scores. To evaluate the impact of specific method
components, we conducted a series of ablation studies. First,
examining the SFT baselines reveals that upgrading the LLM
backbone from SALMONN to AF3 (QualiSpeech-FT) yielded
a marginal 0.03 gain in average PCC, whereas unfreezing the
audio encoder provided a substantial 0.12 boost. This indicates
that the task-specific alignment of acoustic features is signifi-
cantly more beneficial for accurate MOS derivation than merely
scaling the language model. Finally, single-stage ablations
shows that a Reasoning-only model suffers a significant degra-
dation of up to 0.20 PCC in dimension-wise predictions. While
a Calibration-only model maintains a strong average PCC of
0.66, it is structurally incapable of producing natural language
justifications, as we show later.
Table 3 presents the descriptive accuracy metrics for char-
acterizing audio artifacts. Brief descriptions are evaluated via
F1 scores, GPT-4o estimated correlation, and Intersection over
Union (IoU) for temporal localization across noise, distortion,
and unnatural pauses, while long-form descriptions are assessed
using ROUGE-L [23] and GPT-4o correlation. Compared
to existing baselines, our dimension-wise reward approaches
demonstrate clear superiority. The LLM-judge dimension-wise
model is the strongest overall, achieving the highest long-form
ROUGE-L and correlation scores, as well as the most precise
IoU for noise and unnatural pauses. Additionally, our Accu-
racy and Semantic Similarity dimension-wise reward approach
serves as a strong second-best, outperforming both the SFT-
based methods and the unified reward in SQ-LLM. Ablation
studies highlighted in Table 1 and Table3 show the necessity
of the two-stage pipeline: while the Calibration-only model
achieves high numerical accuracy on brief descriptions, it col-
lapses on long-form generations due to its structural constraint
to short answers. Most importantly, our dimension-wise ap-
proaches maintain the numerical precision gained during Cali-
bration, successfully avoiding the degradation observed in both
QualiSpeech and SQ-LLM. Overall, these findings indicate that
dimension-specific rewards prevent the model from conflating
distinct audio artifacts, yielding better descriptive quality and
time localization accuracy.
While the proposed Calibration-Reasoning framework sig-
nificantly improves diagnostic precision, it presents certain lim-
itations. First, unfreezing the audio encoder during the Cali-
bration stage introduces a substantial computational overhead
compared to methods that utilize frozen encoders. Second, our
fine-grained reward design intrinsically depends on the prede-
fined artifact taxonomy of the QualiSpeech benchmark; con-
sequently, the model may struggle to accurately reason about
novel, out-of-distribution degradations (e.g., ultra low-bitrate
codec artifacts) not present in the training distribution.
6. Conclusion
In conclusion, our study highlights the critical architectural
and training components required for interpretable speech qual-
ity assessment. We demonstrate that a two-stage Calibration-
Reasoning pipeline, utilizing an end-to-end trainable Audio
LLM, effectively balances numerical precision with rich de-
scriptive capabilities. Making GRPO rewards dimension-aware
proved pivotal: this fine-grained approach achieved a MOS
PCC of 0.76 on QualiSpeech benchmark, marking a 13% im-
provement over the previous SFT SOTA, while simultane-
ously yielding the highest accuracy of dimension-wise predic-
tions and long-form description agreement. Furthermore, while
an LLM-judge provided the most reliable training signals for
GRPO, a simpler Accuracy and Semantic Similarity reward also
proved highly competitive. By preserving calibration accuracy
while unlocking structured reasoning, our dimension-wise re-
ward framework proves highly effective for localized diagnos-
tics.
In future work, we plan to extend this framework to broader
acoustic domains, including music and spatial audio. Addi-
tionally, we aim to augment the GRPO reasoning stage with
programmatic, signal-processing-based rewards (e.g., algorith-
mic clipping or dropout detectors) to further ground the LLM’s
temporal predictions in objective acoustic reality, reducing
the reliance on computationally expensive LLM-judge reward
pipelines.
172
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
The authors acknowledge the use of Google Gemini model to
polish the writing (e.g. find grammar issues) and assist with the
LaTeX formatting of tables and figures.