Speech and Video Biomarkers Exhibit Reduced Within-Subject Variability in
Early Parkinson’s Disease and Resistance to Placebo and Hawthorne Effects
Hardik Kothare ID 1,∗∗, Oliver Roesler1, Lakshmi Arbatti1, Michael Neumann1, Karl Kieburtz2, Andrew
McGarry2, Craig Thompson3, Vikram Ramanarayanan ID 1,4,∗∗
1 Modality.AI, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA
2 CLINTREX, Sarasota, FL, USA
3 Cerevance, Boston, MA
4 University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA
hardik.kothare@modality.ai
Abstract
Placebo and Hawthorne effects are well-known confounders in
clinical trials, particularly in Parkinson’s disease, contributing
to variability in standard clinical scales like the Movement Dis-
order Society-Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-
UPDRS). Using data collected as part of a Phase 2 clinical trial,
we evaluated speech, facial and finger-tapping digital biomarkers
for within-subject stability and resistance to these contextual
influences. These objective measures exhibited correlation at
baseline with, but lower variability and lower susceptibility to
placebo or observation effects than the MDS-UPDRS, demon-
strating robustness. These findings highlight the potential of au-
diovisual and motor digital biomarkers as reliable, reproducible
endpoints in PD trials, enabling more sensitive detection of dis-
ease progression and treatment effects.
Index Terms: audiovisual biomarkers, parkinson’s disease, clin-
ical trials
1. Introduction
Randomized clinical trials in central nervous system (CNS) dis-
orders, including Parkinson’s disease (PD), are designed to eval-
uate the safety and efficacy of therapeutic interventions using
standardized protocols. Despite these efforts, many trials in PD
fail to meet their primary endpoints or demonstrate clinically-
meaningful effects [1]. Current clinical measures for CNS dis-
eases are largely subjective and limited to episodic assessments
or prone to variability. Dorsey et al. highlight the variabil-
ity in subjective or semi-quantitative measures, such as finger-
tapping in the Movement Disorder Society-Unified Parkinson’s
Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) [2] and suggest that digital
biomarkers could enhance the assessment of novel therapies and
improve decision making [3]. Trials targeting disease modifica-
tion or subtle motor progression are particularly challenged by
these measurement limitations and often fail to detect statisti-
cally or clinically meaningful differences between treatment and
control groups.
Further compounding this issue in PD are pervasive sources
of variability, such as placebo responses and Hawthorne effects,
which arise from participation in research and introduce ad-
ditional noise into clinical endpoints, often inflating apparent
treatment response [4]. Theplacebo effectrefers to changes that
occur when a participant experiences perceived benefits from an
inert treatment or when expectations of improvement alter physi-
ological and behavioural responses [5]. In PD, improvements in
motor rating have been documented in placebo-treated partici-
**indicates the corresponding author.
pants [6]. This effect has been theorized to be driven by neurobi-
ological changes, namely the release of dopamine in the striatal
nuclei [7] and it has been speculated that the neural pathways
underlying this placebo response can be tuned by prior exposure
[8]. The MDS-UPDRS Part III, a clinician-scored motor exam-
ination is particularly susceptible to this placebo effect [9, 10],
perhaps even due to observer/examiner bias [ 11]. Addition-
ally, clinical research is also susceptible to theHawthorne effect
(named after studies conducted at the Hawthorne Works factory
in the 1920s and 1930s), which arises when participants modify
their behaviour or performance when they are being observed
or assessed, regardless of treatment [12]. This phenomenon can
introduce pre-placebo changes in baseline measurements and
obscure longitudinal changes either due to disease severity or
interventions [13]. Research has shown that intensive follow-
up of individuals can bias outcomes in neurological disorders,
especially when the outcomes are subjective in nature [14].
There is a pressing need for objective biomarkers that may
minimize the confounding influence of other effects. There
have been many advances recently in the development of digital
biomarkers that provide objective and granular measures of mo-
tor and non-motor functions. Speech and video based biomarkers
in particular have demonstrated excellent discriminability and
statistical utility for PD assessment [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Dig-
ital speech biomarkers can sensitively detect levodopa-induced
changes, illustrating greater sensitivity to capture subtle physio-
logical effects that traditional subjective scales may miss [21]. In
contrast, the MDS-UPDRS shows marked floor effects and limi-
tations in precision in early PD, indicating that the scale is not
well targeted to very mild symptoms and may be insensitive to
change in early PD [22]. Digital biomarkers also have the added
advantage of reducing costs associated with clinical trials [23].
Taken together, these points motivate the following research
questions: (1) To what extent are MDS-UPDRS subscores and
objective speech/video measures (designed to measure the same
underlying PD constructs) correlated with each other at baseline?
and (2) To what extent are both susceptible to Hawthorne and
placebo effects once the trial starts?To our knowledge, this is
the first work investigating the relative susceptibilities of digital
speech and video measures to Placebo and Hawthorne effects
vis-a-vis the MDS-UPDRS in a real-world early PD Phase 2
trial where no visible motor improvement was observed.
2157
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2850
2. Methods
2.1. Data
We present data from ASCEND, a Phase 2 clinical trial
(NCT06006247) of Solengepras (CVN424). The study recruited
64 participants aged 30 years and older with early untreated
PD who were not yet experiencing motor fluctuations. Partici-
pants were randomized to receive either a treatment of 150mg
solengepras or placebo daily for 12 weeks. 50 (26 placebo, 24
treatment) of these 64 participants completed a remote speech
and video assessment using the Modality platform every two
weeks from the baseline visit through week 12, with follow up
at week 14. A conversational virtual guide steered them through
performing the following tasks that evoked speech, facial and
limb motor behaviour: repetition of consonant-vowel-consonant
words, counting up from one on a single breath, pitch glide (up
and down) while phonating the vowel /i/, oral diadochokinesis
(repeating /pA/, /tA/, /kA/), sentence repetition, reading passage,
picture description, spontaneous speech on a topic of their choice,
finger tapping as fast and wide as possible (Wide Fast task) and
as wide as possible on the beat of a metronome (Wide task) using
both hands. Speech and video data of the interaction is streamed
to a secure cloud server, segmented and relevant measures are
extracted in near real time [24, 25]. All extreme outliers, defined
as values beyond 5 standard deviations (SDs)from the mean
value, were first removed. Then, any values beyond 3 SDs were
flagged as outliers and removed from the analysis in accordance
with the three sigma rule.
It is important to note that this clinical trial failed to meet
its primary endpoint of change from baseline to week 12 on
the MDS-UPDRS Part II + Part III and participants clearly
demonstrated no meaningful change in motor function. In other
words, any change observed must be due to variability and noise
sources.Therefore, we grouped all 50 participants together to
investigate such noise due to placebo/Hawthorne effects and
other variability sources. There were 19 female and 31 male
participants with a mean age of 67.08 years and a standard
deviation of 7.66 years.
2.2. Statistical Analyses
We focus on the Part III (Motor Examination) of the MDS-
UPDRS), a clinician-rated exam of motor signs related to speech,
facial expression, rigidity, bradykinesia, tremor, gait, posture and
postural stability. Higher scores indicate greater motor impair-
ment as rated by the clinician administering the examination. We
will focus on questions related to speech, facial expression and
finger tapping; these are constructs that were evaluated by the
Modality audiovisual assessment.
First, to evaluate whether the individual questions on the
MDS-UPDRS Part III exam and the related automatically-
extracted measures measured the same underlying construct,
we looked at Spearman correlations (|ρ|> 0.3,α = 0.05) at the
baseline visit between the two measures (before any potential
placebo/Hawthorne effects).
Next, to track the longitudinal progression of these
subjective subscores during the course of the trial, we fit a linear
mixed-effects model with change from baseline as the outcome,
visit as a fixed effect, and subject as a random intercept. Least-
squares (LS) means at each post-baseline visit were estimated
via the emmeans (1.10.7) package [ 26] in R (version 4.3.1),
with pairwise contrasts against baseline tested for significance
(α = 0.05). For the individual questions about speech, facial
expression and finger tapping on the MDS-UPDRS Part III,
we plotted change for individual scores along with the most
correlated objective measure at baseline after normalizing on
Table 1:Top three Spearman correlations between digital speech,
facial, and finger-tapping measures (second column) and cor-
responding MDS-UPDRS items (first column) at Baseline visit.
F0 = fundamental frequency of the voice, SD = standard devi-
ation, F2 = second formant frequency, SNR = signal-to-noise
ratio, FTAPL = finger-tapping left hand question, FTAPR =
finger-tapping right hand question. *p<0.05, **p<0.01
UPDRS
Item
Objective Measure Spearman
ρ
Speech
F0 SD, spont. speech -0.36*
F2 during pitch glide up -0.34*
SNR during counting -0.31*
Facial
Eye blink rate, pitch glide down -0.46**
Max lip aperture, pitch glide up -0.40**
Max lower lip acceleration,
spont. speech
-0.37*
FTAPL
Number of taps, Wide -0.55**
95th percentile acceleration,
Wide Fast
-0.44**
Avg absolute acceleration, Wide -0.43**
FTAPR
95th percentile velocity, Wide -0.51**
95th percentile acceleration,
Wide
-0.34*
75th percentile speed, Wide -0.34*
a scale of -1 to 1 for fair head-to-head comparison.
We then compared the relative within-participant variability
of speech, facial expressivity and finger-tapping measures with
MDS-UPDRS scores by calculating the coefficient of variation
(CV = standard deviation ÷ mean) for each participant. Compar-
isons between measures and UPDRS subscores were made using
paired non-parametric Wilcoxon rank-sum tests. Confidence
intervals were estimated via a cluster bootstrap.
3. Results
At the baseline visit, several objective audiovisual measures
showed significant correlations with corresponding clinical sever-
ity scores on the MDS-UPDRS. For speech (see Table 1), the
strongest correlations were observed for acoustic measures re-
lated to pitch variability, acoustic correlates of articulatory con-
trol of the tongue and loudness. Specifically, greater speech
impairment was associated with reduced fundamental frequency
variability during spontaneous speech (Spearman’sρ=−0.36 ,
p= 0.01 ), lower second formant frequency during a pitch glide
task (ρ=−0.34 ,p= 0.02 ), and decreased signal-to-noise ratio
during a counting task (ρ=−0.31,p= 0.03).
Facial measures also demonstrated moderate correlations
with clinician-ratings of facial expression (see Table 1). Higher
MDS-UPDRS Facial Expression scores were associated
with reduced eye blink rate during the pitch glide down task
(ρ=−0.46 , p <0.001 ), smaller maximum lip aperture
during pitch glide up ( ρ=−0.40 , p= 0.005 ), and lower
maximum acceleration of the lower lip during spontaneous
speech (ρ=−0.37,p= 0.01).
For upper-limb motor performance, finger-tapping measures
exhibited strong negative correlations with MDS-UPDRS Finger
Tapping subscores for both hands. For the left hand, greater
2158
(a)MDS-UPDRS Total score
 (b)MDS-UPDRS Part III subtotal
 (c)MDS-UPDRS Part III Speech question and
standard deviation of F0 (fundamental frequency
of voice) during spontaneous speech
(d)MDS-UPDRS Part III Facial Expression ques-
tion and eye blink rate during pitch glide down
(e)MDS-UPDRS Part III Finger Tapping Left
Hand question and number of taps during Wide
task using the left hand
(f)MDS-UPDRS Part III Finger Tapping Right
Hand question and 95th percentile velocity dur-
ing Wide task using the right hand
Figure 1:Least-squares Means plots showing change from baseline across MDS-UPDRS clinical scores and corresponding speech and
motor-derived measures. *p<0.05, **p<0.01. In figures (c) to (f), blue = MDS-UPDRS item and red = digital objective measure.
Table 2:Comparison of coefficients of variation (CV) between MDS-UPDRS scores and objective measures using Wilcoxon rank-sum
tests. CI = confidence interval, F0 = fundamental frequency of the voice, SD = standard deviation, F2 = second formant frequency, SNR
= signal-to-noise ratio, FTAPL = finger-tapping left hand question, FTAPR = finger-tapping right hand question
UPDRS Score (A) Objective Measure (B) Mean CV (A) Mean CV (B)∆CV (AB) CI Low CI High p-value
SPEECH F0 SD, spont. speech 0.872 0.243 0.629 0.371 0.906<0.0001
SPEECH F2 during pitch glide up 0.872 0.051 0.821 0.572 1.099<0.0001
SPEECH SNR during counting 0.872 0.174 0.697 0.446 0.973<0.0001
FACIAL Eye blink rate, pitch
glide down
0.536 1.556 -1.020 -1.280 -0.748<0.0001
FACIAL Max lip aperture, pitch
glide up
0.445 0.136 0.309 0.190 0.444<0.0001
FACIAL Max lower lip accelera-
tion, spont. speech
0.447 0.200 0.247 0.125 0.385<0.0001
FTAPL Number of taps, Wide 0.682 0.260 0.422 0.232 0.616 0.001
FTAPL 95th percentile accelera-
tion, Wide Fast
0.682 0.167 0.515 0.338 0.707<0.0001
FTAPL Avg absolute accelera-
tion, Wide
0.682 0.183 0.499 0.332 0.686<0.0001
FTAPR 95th percentile velocity,
Wide
0.513 0.120 0.393 0.244 0.544<0.0001
FTAPR 95th percentile absolute
acceleration, Wide
0.513 0.094 0.419 0.273 0.571<0.0001
FTAPR 75th percentile speed,
Wide
0.513 0.123 0.390 0.244 0.539<0.0001
2159
clinical impairment was most strongly associated with a reduced
number of taps during the Wide task (ρ=−0.55 ,p<0.001 ),
as well as lower acceleration measures during both Wide and
Wide Fast tasks (all|ρ|≥0.43 ,p<0.005 ). Similarly, for the
right hand, finger-tapping severity correlated most strongly with
reduced peak velocity during the Wide task (ρ=−0.51 ,p <
0.001), followed by lower acceleration and speed percentiles
(|ρ|≈0.34,p<0.05).
When we plot Least-squares (LS) means for the MDS-
UPDRS total score (see Figure 1a) and the Part III subtotal
(see Figure 1b), we see an ‘improvement’ in severity at Weeks 2,
4 and 8, followed by a return to baseline values. The drug did
not work and the primary endpoint of the trial was not met; any
improvement seen in the estimated means when data is collapsed
over active and placebo cohorts could hence be attributed to a
placebo effect. This placebo effect is visible in all the individual
questions related to speech (Figure 1c), facial expression (Figure
1d) and finger tapping (see Figures 1e and 1f); this is consis-
tent with the placebo effect in Parkinson’s disease documented
extensively in the literature [ 7, 27, 8, 10]. This difference is
statistically significant only for the finger-tapping questions (at
weeks 4 and 8 for left and right, respectively).It is notewor-
thy that none of the objective measures measuring the same
constructs (correlated at baseline) as the individual questions
showed a statistically significant change at any visit.
Table 2 compares the coefficient of variation (CV) of MDS-
UPDRS subscores with corresponding objective speech, facial
and finger-tapping measures measuring the same or similar con-
structs. Results are reported as the mean CV for each measure,
the paired difference, 95% bootstrap confidence intervals, and
Wilcoxon p-values. Across domains, objective measures gener-
ally exhibited substantially lower variability than their clinical
counterparts, reflected by positive and statistically significant dif-
ferences in CV (∆CV) for most measures. An exception was eye
blink rate during the pitch glide task, which demonstrated higher
variability than the corresponding clinical score. All reported
differences were statistically significant based on Wilcoxon rank-
sum tests, indicating systematically greater stability of objective
measures relative to clinician-rated scores.
4. Discussion
This work investigated whether digital speech and video biomark-
ers can provide stable, objective measures of PD. We looked
at correlations between digital measures and question on the
MDS-UPDRS scale measuring the same or similar constructs.
At the baseline visit of the ASCEND clinical trial, standard
deviation of the fundamental frequency of participants’ voice cor-
related negatively with speech impairment as rated by an expert
clinician on the MDS-UPDRS Part III speech question. This ob-
servation is consistent with the body of literature on monopitch
or monotone in Parkinsonian voice, i.e. the lack of normal pitch
variation [28, 20] due to hypokinetic dysarthria. This monopitch
phenomenon is caused because of PD-related bradykinesia and
rigidity affecting muscles involved in laryngeal control, thus
limiting the ability to modulate vocal fold tension [29]. Higher
severity on the speech question was also associated with lower
second formant frequency (F2) during the pitch glide task where
participants were asked to produce the vowel /i/. The vowel
/i/ requires a high, front tongue position requiring the speaker
to advance and raise the tongue. Hypokinetic dysarthria and
rigidity may cause restricted tongue movement or articulatory
undershoot and thus a lower F2 value [ 30]. Participants with
PD also showed an association between lower signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) during the counting up from one task and the MDS-
UPDRS Speech score. This is consistent with hypophonia or
abnormally reduced vocal loudness, one of the most prevalent
speech symptoms in Parkinson’s disease (PD) [31]. It arises from
a combination of laryngeal dysfunction and reduced respiratory
support. Another common motor sign of PD is facial bradykine-
sia characterized by the reduction of facial movements and facial
expressions, also called hypomimia [32] or ‘masked face’. Hy-
pomimia often manifests in the form of decreased frequency of
spontaneous blinking rate [33], jaw bradykinesia or downscaling
of articulatory dynamics [34, 32, 18]. Interestingly, participants’
severity on the facial expression question on the MDS-UPDRS
scale correlated with reduced eye blink rate, reduced maximum
lip aperture and reduced lower-lip acceleration during sponta-
neous speech. There is thus a good association between objective
measures capturing hypomimia and clinician ratings of it. The
strongest associations, as indicated by Spearman’sρ values, were
observed between objective measures derived from the finger-
tapping task and the corresponding MDS-UPDRS scores. This
finding is particularly notable because the finger-tapping task
was the only assessment that directly targeted the same construct,
namely limb bradykinesia, in both the MDS -UPDRS and the
remotely captured measures. In contrast, other tasks assessed re-
lated but not identical constructs, which may explain their weaker
correlations. These results highlight the importance of ensuring
construct alignment between traditional clinical scales and digi-
tal or remote assessments when evaluating objective biomarkers
in Parkinson’s disease. Overall, across speech, facial expression,
and upper-limb motor domains, objective audiovisual measures
demonstrated consistent and directionally meaningful associa-
tions with MDS-UPDRS subscores at baseline, supporting their
validity as sensitive markers of motor symptom severity in early
Parkinson’s disease.
Least-squares means analysis revealed that none of the ob-
jective measures showed significant changes from baseline, indi-
cating robustness to placebo and Hawthorne effects. This finding
is particularly noteworthy for the finger-tapping measures, where
the corresponding MDS-UPDRS items did exhibit a significant
placebo response. Additionally, objective measures exhibited
lower within-participant variability compared to MDS-UPDRS
scores, as shown by the coefficient of variation analysis,
suggesting greater measurement precision and reliability.
There are several limitations to this study. Firstly, since
participants in this trial had early PD, they probably had little to
very mild symptoms and the results may not be generalizable to
all PD populations which can be heterogeneous [35]. Secondly,
MDS-UPDRS rater variability and floor/ceiling effects are dif-
ficult to account for in any statistical modelling. Thirdly, there
was no reference data available to model disease-induced change
or learning effects from naturally progressing patients without
any intervention (active or placebo). Data from an observational
study of a similar sample of patients can help address this issue
in future studies.
5. Conclusion
Objective audiovisual measures provide consistent, meaningful
correlations with MDS-UPDRS subscores, supporting their va-
lidity as sensitive measures of motor symptom severity in early
Parkinson’s disease. These measures are relatively robust to
placebo and Hawthorne effects, unlike the MDS-UPDRS and
exhibit lower within-participant variability, indicating greater
precision. Together, these findings suggest that objective, remote
assessments could complement or enhance conventional clinical
scales in randomized clinical trials in PD.
2160
6. Acknowledgements
We thank the participants of the clinical trial for their time.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
We used generative AI for drafting and editing of text based
on detailed notes and guidance of the authors, as well as for
generating LaTeX table templates and Python analysis code. All
AI-assisted content was reviewed, revised, and approved by the
authors.