Audiovisual CXMI: Scene-based Context Tagging for Spoken Language
Translation Evaluation
Dayeon Ku ID 1, Hwayoung Park ID 2, Hong Kook Kim ID 1,2,3
1 Dept. of EECS, 2 Dept. of AI Convergence,
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea
3 AunionAI Co., Ltd., Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea
dayeonku@gm.gist.ac.kr, hwayoung park@gm.gist.ac.kr, hongkook@gist.ac.kr
Abstract
Existing metrics assess translation quality at the sentence level
but cannot measure how well a machine translation model uti-
lizes context. Conditional Cross-Mutual Information (CXMI)
quantifies context usage, yet considers only text, missing audio-
visual cues that human translators exploit. We propose Audio-
visual CXMI (A V-CXMI), an extension of CXMI with scene-
based audiovisual tags extracted from video. Our framework
first segments video into scenes via visual boundary detection
refined by speaker analysis. Next, we extract structured tags
capturing six contextual categories from multimodal streams,
and finally, evaluate translation quality conditioned on the ex-
tracted tags. Experiments on Korean–English film translation
show that the proposed A V-CXMI achieves significantly higher
correlation with human judgment (Pearsonr=0.400,p<0.003)
and a larger system effect (η2=0.519,p<0.001) than a text-only
CXMI, resolving the phenomenon that human translations are
scored lower than machine outputs in the text-only CXMI.
Index Terms: context-aware machine translation, conditional
cross-mutual information, audiovisual tag extraction, scene ex-
traction
1. Introduction
Recent advancements in machine translation (MT) have
achieved human-like fluency at the sentence level, demonstrat-
ing remarkable performance across diverse domains. Neverthe-
less, the quality of sentence-by-sentence MT significantly dete-
riorates when assessed within an entire discourse [1, 2]. This
limitation highlights a fundamental inability to capture contex-
tual dependencies, which leads to critical errors, such as incon-
sistent terminology and incorrect pronoun resolution across the
sentences within the discourse [2, 3].
To address this issue, context-aware translation leveraging
surrounding sentences has been actively pursued [4]. How-
ever, such methods relying solely on textual information have
yet to yield distinct performance improvements. This is pri-
marily because discourse phenomena—such as pronoun resolu-
tion, named entity consistency, and tense agreement—are af-
fected differently depending on the sentence distance within
the context [5]. Furthermore, regardless of the recent advance-
ments in translation performance achieved by utilizing large
language models (LLMs) for context-aware translation, sophis-
ticated contextual understanding remains necessary [6].
In spoken-language translation, speech and language regis-
ters are influenced by the relationship between the speakers, the
setting, and the purpose of the interaction [7]. For example, ac-
tor dialog must be translated considering visual communication
cues, such as gestures, gazes, and body language. Moreover, a
word, such as “here,” can be interpreted differently depending
on the physical setting conveyed by the visual scene. Because of
such dependencies, maintaining consistency at the scene level is
Figure 1:An overview of the scene extraction processing
pipeline for the proposed AV-CXMI.
difficult for context-aware MT that utilizes only text. Thus, the
quality of context-aware MT could be improved using informa-
tion that exists outside the text. Due to the popularity of video
streaming services, audiovisual (A V) MT [8] or multimodal MT
(MMT), which combines multimodal features from video with
text, has been actively studied [9, 10, 11].
Despite such efforts, quantitative metrics that can measure
how much A V contextual information actually contributes to
translation quality remain questionable. Since existing metrics,
such as BLEU [12] or COMET [13], focus on lexical and se-
mantic similarity at the sentence level, it is difficult to discern
whether an MT system has effectively utilized context [14]. To
handle specific discourse phenomena, the contrastive evaluation
method [3] has been proposed for evaluating MT performance
in terms of linguistic categories; however, it does not consider
any contextual information [15]. On the other hand, Condi-
tional Cross-Mutual Information (CXMI) [16] was introduced
to quantify context usage in translation and has since been
adopted for evaluating document-level MT systems [15, 17], an-
alyzing discourse phenomena [18] and assessing visual ground-
ing in MMT [19]. However, our experiments (Section 3) re-
vealed that CXMI assigned higher scores to context-aware MT
output than to human translations, even though human evalua-
tors judged the latter as superior. We attribute this discrepancy
to the absence of A V information in CXMI: since human trans-
lators leverage visual and acoustic cues that text-only models
cannot capture, CXMI underestimates the quality of context-
rich human translations.
In this paper, we propose A V-CXMI—an extended variant
of CXMI conditioned by scene-based A V tags. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first evaluation framework that in-
corporates A V context into an information-theoretic MT metric.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We first build a scene extraction pipeline for dataset con-
struction that ensures contextual coherence within a scene,
5378
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2175
enabling scene-level evaluation of A V content.
• Next, we establish an A V-tag extraction pipeline to extract
contextual information, including acoustic (tone, emotion,
and background sound) and visual (scene setting and char-
acter appearance) modalities.
• Finally, we propose A V-CXMI and validate its performance
using Korean–English film translation data, observing that
it achieves a statistically significant correlation with human
evaluation scores (r=0.400,p<0.003). Furthermore, A V-
CXMI correctly identifies the expected system quality hi-
erarchy in 77.8% of evaluation samples with a large effect
size (η 2=0.519,p<0.001), which outperforms the text-only
CXMI.
2. Method
2.1. Scene extraction
2.1.1. Scene segmentation
To collect a scene-level contextual dataset for CXMI training,
we segment an input video into consecutive scenes by detect-
ing visually and acoustically separable scene boundaries in the
video content. As shown in the top part of Fig. 1, the scene
segmentation procedure comprises a shot detection block and a
scene boundary detection block.
First, the shot detection block employs PySceneDetect 1 to
detect shot boundaries when the weighted average of the pixel
differences in the color space (hue, saturation, value) between
adjacent video frames exceeds a predefined threshold. A shot
is defined as a continuous sequence of frames captured by a
single camera action [20]. Thus, each shot is represented by
three keyframes, namely the starting, middle, and ending video
frames, which are concatenated to serve as the input for scene
boundary detection.
Second, the scene boundary detection block is implemented
using the Scene Consistency Representation Learning code
[21]. This block extracts visual features by feeding the data of
the previously concatenated shot into ResNet50 and identifies
the final scene boundaries by analyzing the similarity between
the resulting embeddings of adjacent shots.
2.1.2. Scene refinement
The video scene detection method described above often fails
to maintain temporal consistency, potentially grouping non-
adjacent shots into a single scene [22]. To mitigate this prob-
lem, we propose an audio-based scene refinement algorithm that
evaluates contextual continuity by analyzing speaker composi-
tions across adjacent scenes.
The proposed algorithm follows a three-stage pipeline:
1)Audio preprocessing:To ensure robust speaker analy-
sis, SCNet [23], a state-of-the-art music source separa-
tion model, is employed to disentangle vocal signals from
background noise and music.
2)Speaker identification and clustering:Speaker embed-
dings are extracted from the separated vocals using the
ECAPA-TDNN [24] model, followed by agglomerative hi-
erarchical clustering [25] to identify individual speakers
within each scene, which are referred to as a speaker set.
This unsupervised approach allows for flexible identifica-
tion without prior knowledge of the number of individuals.
3)Jaccard-based refinement:Jaccard-based refinement fi-
nalizes the scene boundaries by analyzing speaker overlaps
between adjacent scenes. The similarity between speaker
sets in adjacent scenes is quantified using the Jaccard index
1https://github.com/Breakthrough/PySceneDetect
[26]. If this similarity exceeds a predefined threshold, the
scenes are merged into a single scene, which helps capture
continuity that may be visually undetectable. Conversely,
a low Jaccard value confirms a distinct scene transition.
2.2. Audiovisual tag extraction
2.2.1. LLM-based AV tags
Prior work has shown that automatically annotated support-
ing context yields conclusions similar to those from human-
annotated context when CXMI is used to measure context uti-
lization in document-level MT [15]. Motivated by this finding,
we expand the supporting context to include acoustic and visual
information from video content.
For visual input, we first extract keyframes at uniform inter-
vals from each scene and arrange them into grid images, with
longer scenes split across multiple grids to preserve temporal
resolution. Then, we ask an LLM, typically here GPT-4o [27]
with chain-of-thought prompting [28], to organize the facial
emotional states, background image, and interpersonal dynam-
ics into a structured visual context summary. For acoustic input,
we simply take the audio track assigned to each scene and then
ask GPT-4o-audio-preview [29] to prepare a structured acoustic
context summary. In parallel, we transcribe the audio track us-
ing Whisper [30] to obtain subtitles when the source-language
subtitles are unavailable. The resulting acoustic and visual con-
text summaries, along with the grid images and the subtitles, are
subsequently provided to GPT-4o for A V-tag assignment. The
specific prompts for each process are listed in the Supplemen-
tary Note.
Given the aforementioned inputs, GPT-4o follows a three-
step reasoning process to identify four tags in a form of
<key:value>from a predefined set from the first to the
fourth row of Table 1: (1) infer speaker relationships (REL)
by combining acoustic cues (tone and emotion) with visual
cues (age, attire, and proximity); (2) identify physical locations
(SETTING) from visual context; and (3) determine the time of
day (TIME) from visual cues and dialog, in addition to assessing
the emotional atmosphere (MOOD) from A V signals. Apart from
the four tags, two keys (DIALOG,POLITENESS) are extracted
using specialized classifiers, as described in Section 2.2.2. Con-
sequently, each sentence is annotated in the following format:
<SETTING:...><REL:...><TIME:...><MOOD:...>
<DIALOG:...><POLITENESS:...>sentence
Importantly, we perform self-consistency decoding [31] to
reduce the variance resulting from LLM stochasticity, repeating
the process three times and selecting the most consistent result.
2.2.2. Dialog act and honorific tags
To ensure that translations preserve the speaker’s intent and sit-
uational nuances, we extract theDIALOGandPOLITENESS
keys that capture sentence-level pragmatics and interpersonal
dynamics, respectively. To capture sentence-level pragmatics,
we employ a BERT-based model trained on AI-Hub speech
act datasets [32], classifying sentences into 22 categories, such
as greetings, questions, commands, etc. These categories, ex-
tracted with approximately 80% accuracy, are explicitly en-
coded as context for the CXMI model. This guarantees that
pragmatic nuances—such as apologies or requests that must
be preserved during translation—are effectively reflected in the
evaluation.
Additionally, languages with grammaticalized honorific
systems, such as Korean and Japanese, utilize formal and infor-
mal registers to signal interpersonal dynamics and contextual
shifts. Within a scene, an abrupt change in register often in-
dicates a significant shift in speaker attitude or situational con-
5379
Table 1:List of scene-based tag keys, input modalities, and predefined tag values.
Tag Key Input Modality Description Tag Values
SETTING Video Physical location HOME,WORK,SCHOOL,HOSPITAL,RESTAURANT,SHOP,HOTEL,STREET,PARK,NATURE,
VEHICLE,PUBLIC,OTHER
REL A V Speaker relationship FAMILY,FRIEND,COLLEAGUE,COUPLE,SUPERIOR,SUBORDINATE,STRANGER,ENEMY,OTHER
TIME Video + text Time of day MORNING,DAY,EVENING,NIGHT
MOOD A V Emotional atmosphere CASUAL,FORMAL,TENSE,ROMANTIC,CONFLICT
DIALOG Audio + text Speech act STATEMENT,QUESTION,COMMAND,ASSERTION,PROMISE,DECLARATION,ACCEPTANCE,
NEGATIVE,APOLOGY,GRATITUDE,COMPLIMENT,COMPLAINT,WARNING/THREAT,
EXCLAMATION,REQUEST,EXPRESSION OF SORROW,GREETING,SOCIALIZING,CALLING,
EVASION,OTHER EXPRESSIONS,NONE
POLITENESS Text Formality level POLITE,CASUAL
text. By encoding this information intoPOLITENESStags us-
ing a Korean formal classifier [33], the CXMI model can evalu-
ate whether translations maintain appropriate tonal consistency
throughout a scene. This enables the metric to penalize transla-
tions that fail to reflect any pragmatic shifts present in the source
sentence.
2.3. Proposed A V-CXMI
2.3.1. Original CXMI
CXMI [16] quantifies the extent to which a translation model
benefits from contextual information. Given a source sentence
X, target sentenceY, and contextC, CXMI measures the re-
duction in uncertainty when context is provided:
CXMI(C→Y|X) =H qMTA (Y|X)−H qMTC (Y|X,C) (1)
whereq MTA andq MTC denote the output distributions of a context-
agnostic and a context-aware MT model, respectively, and
HqM (·)is the cross-entropy under a modelM. In Equation
1, a positive CXMI indicates that the contextCimproves trans-
lation probability, while a negative value implies that context
introduces noise.
However, this original CXMI considers only textual context
from surrounding sentences. As discussed in the Introduction,
this is insufficient for A V content, where acoustic and visual
cues critically influence translation quality. Hence, we extend
CXMI by incorporating A V tags as structured context.
2.3.2. Extended context formulation
For a scene containingNsource–target sentence pairs, letx (i)
andy (i) denote thei-th source sentence,X, and its target trans-
lation,Y, respectively (i= 1,···,N). We define the extended
context for each sentence as:
C (i)
AV ={T (i),x (i−k),···,x (i−1)} (2)
whereT (i) denotes an A V-tag set extracted from audiovisual
streams (Section 2.2) and{x (i−k),···,x (i−1)}represents the
kpreceding source sentences. The A V-tag setT (i) of thei-th
sentence consists of six keys:
T (i) ={SETTING,REL,TIME,MOOD,DIALOG,POLITENESS}. (3)
Among the six tag keys,SETTINGandTIMEare expected to
remain relatively stable throughout a scene, as scenes are cap-
tured in a consistent physical space and time period. In contrast,
REL,MOOD,DIALOG, andPOLITENESSmay vary across sen-
tences within the same scene, depending on the speakers and
their interactions. Accordingly, the A V-tag setT (i) is assigned
per sentence to capture such sentence-level variations.
Based on this extended context, the proposed A V-CXMI is
defined by expanding the cross-entropy terms in Equation 1 into
token-level log-probabilities as:
A V-CXMI(CAV→Y|X) = 1
N
NX
i=1
logqMTC (y(i)|x (i),C (i)
AV )
qMTA(y(i)|x (i),T (i)).(4)
Unlike the original CXMI in Equation 1, bothq MTC andq MTA
receiveT (i) to maintain matched input conditions; otherwise,
the absence of tags at inference causes a train–test mismatch
that confounds context measurement.
2.3.3. Score interpretation
The sign of A V-CXMI in Equation 4 reveals how effectively
a translation utilizes textual context when conditioned on A V
tags:
•Positive A V-CXMI: The preceding sentences improve trans-
lation probability when given the A V tags, which indicates
that the translation maintains contextual coherence with sur-
rounding dialog and scene information.
•Negative A V-CXMI: The preceding sentences lower the
translation probability when given the A V tags, which sug-
gests that the translation is inconsistent with the contextual
flow of the scene.
Since A V tags are provided to bothq MTA andq MTC as
matched input conditions, A V-CXMI measures the effect of tex-
tual context alone, which enables it to properly credit trans-
lations that reflect situational nuances invisible to text-only
CXMI.
2.3.4. Model architecture
A V-CXMI is based on the mBART-based encoder–decoder ar-
chitecture [17] for CXMI computation. Training proceeds in
two phases: to estimateq MTC, we first pretrain the MT model on
a large-scale Korean–English parallel corpus with only textual
context, as expressed in Equation 1, whereq MTA corresponds to
qMTC whenCis set toNull. Next,q MTC is fine-tuned on scene-
segmented film data with A V tags prepended to the source sen-
tences. We set the source context size tok=2, i.e., the current
sentence plus two preceding sentences, based on prior works
showing diminishing returns for longer contexts [16, 34, 35].
The training configurations are detailed in the Supplementary
Note. To ensure robustness, all experiments are conducted with
repeated 3-fold cross-validation. During inference, we compute
A V-CXMI by comparing the log-probabilities of the target sen-
tence from the context-agnostic model (with A V tags but no pre-
ceding sentences) and that from the context-aware model (with
both A V tags and preceding sentences), as described in Equa-
tion 4.
3. Experiments
3.1. Dataset
To train the baseline CXMI model in [17], we utilized two
publicly available Korean–English datasets from AI-Hub: (1)
the Broadcast Content Korean–English Translation Speech
Dataset [36], which contained spoken dialog from actual broad-
casts with colloquial expressions and situational context, and
(2) the Korean–English Translation Parallel Corpus [37], which
comprised conversational text with preserved contextual con-
tinuity. While the two datasets were composed of 315K sen-
tence pairs in total, without any video, there was no problem
in training the baseline CXMI because it considered only tex-
5380
tual context while ignoring any A V context. Specifically, the
scene-level grouping of sentence pairs was performed for the
Broadcast Content Korean–English Translation Speech Dataset,
which yielded 8,628 scenes. However, the sentence pairs in
the Korean–English Translation Parallel Corpus were already
grouped into 25,000 scenes.
Audio and video contents were required to obtain A V tags
for training the proposed A V-CXMI model. Since the two afore-
mentioned datasets did not include any video, we prepared a
proprietary dataset of 97 Korean films across diverse genres to
establish the proposed A V-CXMI model by fine-tuning the base-
line CXMI model. The dataset was randomly divided into 91
and 6 films for training and evaluating the A V-CXMI model, re-
spectively. Next, we extracted three clips (1–2 min each) from
each of the six evaluation films (denoted as M1–M6), thereby
obtaining 18 evaluation clips. The data selection process for
training and evaluation was repeated three times (repeated 3-
fold cross-validation). Each clip in the evaluation subset was
translated using three translation systems representing different
quality–cost trade-offs: (1) professional human translators as
the upper bound, (2) a cloud-based LLM (GPT-4o [27]), and
(3) a small-scale LLM (sLLM), MADLAD-400-3B-MT [38],
which is a lightweight 3B-parameter model suitable for on-
device deployment. This procedure yielded a total of 54 evalu-
ation samples per fold (18 clips×3 systems).
3.2. Evaluation metrics
We evaluated the translation quality of the three systems using
two objective measures—CXMI and the proposed A V-CXMI.
In this experiment, the CXMI scores were computed by com-
paring the log-probabilities from the context-agnostic model
(no context) and the context-aware model (with preceding sen-
tences only), while the A V-CXMI scores were computed using
Equation 4. As a reference, we also computed the correlation
between the objective measure and the human judgment scores
to examine the effectiveness of A V-CXMI. The human evalu-
ation involved 20 people fluent in both Korean and English to
rate each translation on a 5-point mean opinion score (MOS)
scale that assesses naturalness, accuracy, and contextual appro-
priateness. Notably, the evaluators were blinded to the system
identity during MOS scoring.
3.3. Results and discussion
3.3.1. Effect of AV tags
Table 2 compares the CXMI and A V-CXMI scores across differ-
ent test films for Fold 1. As shown in the table, the CXMI scores
produced, on average, areversedranking. In other words, hu-
man translation was scoredlowerthan LLM and sLLM (4 out
of 6 films). This is because the CXMI model without A V tags
relied solely on textual context, while human translators natu-
rally incorporated visual and acoustic cues (e.g., speaker age,
tone, and setting) into context-dependent paraphrasing. Con-
versely, the proposed A V-CXMI could correctly rank human
translations the highest across all films as the structured tags
were able to preserve the human perception of context due to
the added acoustic and visual context.
3.3.2. Correlation with human evaluation
Fig. 2 compares the Pearson correlations of CXMI and A V-
CXMI with human MOS across 54 samples. The text-only
CXMI showed a negative correlation (r=−0.295,p<0.05),
confirming that higher CXMI scores do not align with hu-
man judgment when A V context is absent. In contrast, A V-
CXMI achieved a statistically significant positive correlation
(r=0.400,p<0.003), which demonstrates that incorporating
Table 2:Comparison of CXMI and AV-CXMI scores averaged
over three video clips (Fold 1).
CXMI A V-CXMI
Film Human LLM sLLM Human LLM sLLM
M1 0.8121.2731.239 0.299−0.272−0.347
M2 0.7720.9130.912 0.461−0.077−0.266
M3 1.2360.885 0.831 0.460−0.123−0.146
M4 1.8901.872 1.866 0.377−0.207−0.295
M5 1.234 1.4761.480 0.410−0.116−0.217
M6 1.2671.8741.850 0.387−0.093−0.212
Avg 1.2021.3821.363 0.399−0.148−0.247
Figure 2:Correlation between CXMI scores and human MOS.
The solid red line represents AV-CXMI, and the dashed blue line
represents text-only CXMI. Shapes indicate films (M1–M6), and
colors indicate translation systems.
A V tags reverses the aforementioned trend and helps capture
human-perceived translation quality.
To quantify the discriminative power of A V-CXMI further,
we conducted a one-way ANOV A 2 across the three transla-
tion systems. A V-CXMI correctly identified the expected qual-
ity hierarchy (Human>LLM>sLLM) in 77.8% of sam-
ples (14/18), with a large system effect (F=27.53 inF-test,
p<0.001,η 2=0.519). All pairwise differences were statisti-
cally significant (Human vs. LLM:p<0.001, Cohen’sd=1.78;
LLM vs. sLLM:p<0.05,d=0.63; Human vs. sLLM:p<0.001,
d=2.26). For comparison, human MOS showed a comparable
but slightly smaller effect (η 2=0.411) than A V-CXMI, which
verifies that A V-CXMI can capture system-level quality differ-
ences at a granularity consistent with human judgment [39]. A
detailed per-sample analysis with visualizations is outlined in
the Supplementary Note.
4. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed A V-CXMI, an extension of CXMI
that incorporated scene-based A V tags into the evaluation of
spoken language translation. Our approach comprised three
components: (1) a scene extraction pipeline combining vision-
based segmentation with audio-based refinement, (2) an A V-tag
extraction pipeline that captured acoustic and visual context via
a multimodal LLM and specialized dialog act and honorifics
classifiers, and (3) 