Building Tailored Speech Recognizers for Japanese Speaking Assessment
Yotaro Kubo, Richard Sproat, Chihiro Taguchi, Llion Jones
Sakana AI, Japan
{yotarokubo,rws,chihirotaguchi,llion}@sakana.ai
Abstract
This paper presents methods for building speech recognizers
tailored for Japanese speaking assessment tasks. Speciﬁcally,
we build a speech recognizer that outputs phonemic labels with
accent markers. Although Japanese is resource-rich, there is
only a small amount of data for training models to produce ac-
curate phonemic transcriptions that include accent marks. We
propose two methods to mitigate data sparsity. First, a multitask
training scheme introduces auxiliary loss functions to estimate
orthographic text labels and pitch patterns of the input signal,
so that utterances with only orthographic annotations can be
leveraged in training. The second fuses two estimators, one
over phonetic alphabet strings, and the other over text token
sequences. To combine these estimates we develop a novel al-
gorithm based on the ﬁnite-state transducer framework. Our
results indicate that the use of multitask learning and fusion
is effective for building an accurate phonemic recognizer. We
show that this approach is advantageous compared to the use
of generic multilingual recognizers. The relative advantages of
the proposed methods were also compared. Our proposed meth-
ods reduced the average of mora-label error rates from 12.3%
to 7.1% over the CSJ core evaluation sets.
Index Terms: Automatic speech recognition, phonemic tran-
scription, pitch-accented language, speaking assessment.
1. Introduction
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) technology has been
evolving to enable the mapping of speech signals to canonical
textual representations under a variety of conditions. In typical
ASR systems, speaker errors, such as incorrect accent positions,
mispronunciations, ﬁllers, and hesitations, are intentionally dis-
carded. Although many applications prefer such canonical out-
put over phonetically accurate transcriptions, in areas like lan-
guage education, this normalization effect is a limitation since
it hinders accurate evaluation of users’ speaking proﬁciency.
There have been several attempts to build universal pho-
netic transcribers, with a particular focus on extending ASR
to low-resource languages [ 1, 2, 3]. While multilingual mod-
els are potentially applicable to speaking skill assessment, as-
sessing language-speciﬁc phenomena, such as pitch accent, is
also essential for educational purposes. In this paper, we fo-
cus on phonemic transcription of Japanese, including pitch ac-
cent markers, to build a speech recognizer tailored for Japanese
speaking assessment. Considering the complexity and irregular-
ity of Japanese pitch accent rules [4, 5], this presents a challenge
that cannot be solved only by multilingual phonetic recognizers.
The training of phonetically accurate recognizers often suf-
fers from the limited availability of accurate phonetic or phone-
mic transcriptions. Although Japanese is a relatively resource-
Speech Encoder 
Causal Transformer 
Phonetic Alphabet (PA) 
Sequences 
fo Classes 
Text Tokens (TTs) 
Refined PA 
Sequences 
TT-to-PA 
Lattice Fusion 
Lexicon 
Figure 1: Proposed architecture of our PA recognizer . White
boxes are neural nets, gray boxes are rule-based processes.
rich language, the largest multi-speaker dataset with hand-
annotated pitch accent is, to the best of our knowledge, the
“core” subset of the Corpus of Spontaneous Japanese (CSJ) [ 6],
containing only 45 hours of speech.
Prior work by [ 7] developed a phonemic recognizer condi-
tioned on the outputs of external speech recognizers. Although
their method did not include a built-in ASR component, there
are several similarities to our proposal. Their system performs
both implicit conditioning, employing text tokens as an aux-
iliary input, and explicit conditioning using text information
as constraints on decoding. Unlike their implicit conditioning
method, our approach does not require reliable text labels be-
cause it solves text and phonetic alphabet (PA) recognition si-
multaneously in a multitask learning framework. Further, as
discussed in the following section, one can view our decoding
method as an extension of their explicit conditioning method
that can ﬂexibly introduce text constraints. For a conventional
ASR task, [ 8] proposes an iterative reﬁnement method in order
to estimate PA and text token sequences jointly. However, this
method does not estimate accent location and does not use a
dictionary to enhance accuracy in small data scenarios.
The technical contributions in this paper are twofold: First,
a task design effective for pitch-accent recognition; second,
a decoding method that decodes an optimal PA sequence ro-
bustly by considering both text tokens and PA estimation re-
sults. These novel methods are implemented in a streamable
ASR model, and comparative experiments were conducted to
conﬁrm their effectiveness. Fig. 1 illustrates the methods. The
next three sections describe the components in the ﬁgure.
2. System Design
2.1. Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation
Conventionally, language models are integrated into ASR sys-
tems in order to improve the output quality leveraging the fre-
quencies of phrases and words. However, since one of our goals
is to detect errors in speech that manifest as infrequent ﬂuctua-
tions in token sequences, such corrections by language models
may conﬂict with this objective.
Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) can be a so-
2078
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1672
lution to this problem. Unlike other ASR architectures, such
as RNN-T [ 9] and LAS [ 10], a CTC model does not include
a module for capturing mutual dependency within the output
sequences. Therefore, it is expected that CTC models are in-
capable of correcting erroneous utterances into canonical ones.
While it has been reported that even CTC can implicitly learn
an internal language model [ 11, 12], CTC is still considered the
best choice if error correction needs to be minimized.
2.2. Corpus of Spontaneous Japanese (CSJ)
For our purposes, a training set annotated with PAs and accent
markers is required. The transcription in the dataset must be
faithful to the original speech, including errors. CSJ includes
manual annotations for such speech variation. On this dataset,
one can train a recognizer that can detect such errors represented
in PAs. A subset of CSJ (called “core”) provides mora-wise
phonemic annotations in katakana and the perceived location of
accent; 1 however, this subset is only a small fraction of the en-
tire dataset, consisting of only 23,683 training utterances, or less
than 6% of the entire CSJ training dataset. Although Japanese is
considered to be a resource-rich language, given the sparsity of
accent-annotated datasets, it is still not straightforward to build
an accurate recognizer out of the available data. The next sec-
tions describe practical remedies for this limitation.
3. Multitask learning
The sparsity of phonetic labels with accent information is the
central challenge in developing speech recognizers tailored for
Japanese speaking assessment. The ﬁrst remedy we employ is
multitask learning. Orthographic transcription is cheaper to ob-
tain compared to phonemic annotation, especially if the phone-
mic annotation also requires accent annotation. Since text tran-
scriptions and phonemic annotations are expected to be mu-
tually dependent, solving two tasks simultaneously can help
learning a common representation of speech.
On the other hand, estimated pitch information is also cheap
to obtain via a high-quality fundamental frequency ( fo ) extrac-
tion algorithm. Since Japanese has lexical pitch accent, pitch
information is also expected to be highly correlated with the
target labels. Thus, in this paper, we train a transformer with
three estimation tasks: one for PAs, one for text tokens (TTs),
and one for estimated fo classes.
3.1. Encoder Description
To maximize downstream utility, the proposed model is de-
signed to be streamable. In order to ensure this, we adopt a
streamable speech encoder and a causal transformer. For the
speech encoder, we adopt the Mimi [ 14] model pretrained with
7 million hours of multilingual (mostly English) datasets [ 15].
Since our model does not require discrete inputs, the quantiza-
tion and down-sampling modules are removed from Mimi.
Our transformer model is based on Llama-2 [ 16]. Although
Llama-2 was originally proposed for auto-regressive decoder-
only modeling, our method adopts this architecture for making
an encoder-only CTC model. Model parameters are randomly
initialized. The embedding dimensionality is set to 512, the
number of layers to 24, and the number of attention heads to
8. To overcome overﬁtting, dropout with probability of 0.2 is
1Japanese is a mora-timed language, a mora being a prosodic unit
corresponding to a short vowel (V) or a single post-vocalic consonant
(C). Each mora ideally occupies about the same amount of time, though
see [13] for a detailed review of the situation for Japanese.
applied to the input embeddings from the Mimi encoder and the
attention probabilities in each self-attention layer.
3.2. Phonetic Alphabet and Text Token Tasks
Our PA tokenizer assumes a katakana transcription of the ut-
terance. If an accent is placed on a mora, this is denoted by
appending an apostrophe to the mora label (e.g. Ωϡ /kjW/ with
accent is denoted as Ωϡ’). The long-vowel marker ( ʔ) is re-
placed by a copy of the preceding vowel. For example, the Ωϡ
ʔ /kjW:/ is replaced by Ωϡ΢ /kjW W /. Similarly, Ωϡ’ ʔ
is replaced by Ωϡ’ ΢. We collected all tokens from the CSJ
core training set, resulting in 243 unique output tokens. Text to-
kens (TTs) are character-based. We collected all Unicode points
from the CSJ training dataset (core and non-core) after NFKC
normalization, resulting in 2,309 distinct tokens.
We use two CTC estimators for PAs and TTs, each con-
taining a fully-connected layer for computing logits of the CTC
label distribution—i.e. the TT or PA token plus a “blank” token
indicating absence of the corresponding output label.
3.3. fo Classiﬁer Task
The objective of the fo classiﬁer task is to ensure that pitch
information is propagated through the transformer, allowing the
model to estimate fo contours. For each utterance, the Harvest
algorithm [17] is applied to estimate fo each 10 ms. Since pitch
accent is based not on the pitch itself, but rather its trajectory,
the task is designed to estimate predeﬁned classes that indicate
if fo is going up or down.
For deﬁning classes over fo patterns, we compared the av-
erage log- fo of three consecutive windows. Speciﬁcally, us-
ing the center time stamp of the n-th frame, tn, we deﬁne the
left, central and right windows as Ln = [ tn − 3w, tn − w),
Cn = [ tn − w, tn + w), and Rn = [ tn + w, tn + 3w), re-
spectively, where w is the half-window length, set to 20 ms.
Let V (S) denote voicedness of a window S ∈ { Ln, Cn, Rn}.
V (S) = voiced iff all pitch estimation timestamps in S have
valid frequency estimates; otherwise, V (S) = unvoiced. The
average of log- fo , P (S), is computed only when V (S) =
voiced.
There are four possible combinations of V (Ln) and
V (Rn). When V (Ln) = V (Rn) = voiced, the class is
further split according to whether P (Ln) < P (Rn). Thus,
the patterns of left and right windows are categorized into ﬁve
classes, which are further divided by the voicedness of the cen-
tral window, V (Cn). As a result, each frame is classiﬁed into
one of ten classes based on the estimated fo trajectory.
A fully connected layer is introduced to estimate logits for
the fo classes. The training loss is enhanced by adding a term
representing the cross-entropy loss of this class estimator.
4. Lattice Fusion
To increase the accuracy of the PA recognizer in the face of
data sparsity, our method consolidates estimation results of TT
and PA recognition by combining well-known ﬁnite-state trans-
ducer (FST) operations. Whereas ﬁnite-state acceptors (FSA)
represent probabilistic distributions over sequences, FSTs rep-
resent probabilistic mappings between sequences. We use
FSAs—“lattices”—to represent distributions over PA and TT
sequences. The TT lattice is converted to a second PA lattice
using an FST constructed from a pronunciation dictionary. Fi-
nally, the most plausible PA sequence from the union of the two
PA lattices is extracted. We term this procedure “lattice fusion”.
2079
!
a
e
!
a
i
!
e
u
! !:ε 
a
a:a 
e
e:e 
i
i:i 
!:ε 
a:ε 
e:e 
i:i 
!:ε 
a:a 
e:ε 
i:i 
!:ε 
a:a 
e:e 
i:ε 
(a) CTC confusion network 
(b) CTC blank remover 
…
Figure 2: FST representation of (a) CTC outputs and (b) blank
ϕ removal. F or brevity, only phonemes /a, i, e/ andϕ are shown.
4.1. Lattice Construction from CTC outputs
Let Y ∈ RT ×K be an array of log probabilities of each class in
CTC output layer, including the special blank symbol ϕ, where
yt,k denotes the log-probability of label k emitted at time t. For
each utterance, a confusion network over the CTC labels can be
constructed as in Fig. 2 (a). In confusion networks, each non-
ﬁnal state represents the timestamp t and outgoing arcs from
state t are deﬁned for each possible k. The arc labeled as k from
state t is designed to have a weight representing the negative log
probability as w = −yt,k. Let S P be the confusion network
constructed by this procedure.
The CTC output labels must be post-processed by remov-
ing same-label repetitions and blank ϕ symbols. This post-
processing can be represented as a transducer as in Fig. 2 (b).
By applying the composition operator to the confusion net-
work S P and the CTC postprocessing FST BP, and projecting
the FST to the output labels, the lattice LP that represents a
probability distribution over all possible PA sequences can be
computed. For computational efﬁciency, we further applied a
lattice pruning method and further optimization for maximiz-
ing the efﬁciency of the subsequent procedures, as follows:
LP = Opt( πo(S P ◦ B P)). Here, ◦ denotes the composition
operator on FSTs, πo projects an FST to its output labels, and
Opt is an optimization procedure that prunes, removes ϵ, de-
terminizes, and minimizes [ 18] the input, in this order, over
the log semiring. Following the procedure, a compact repre-
sentation of PA distribution can be obtained from the output
log-probabilities of the PA-CTC task. We can similarly obtain
TT sequence distributions from log-probabilities in the TT-CTC
task. Let S T be the confusion network constructed in the same
way from the TT log-probabilities. Following the above proce-
dure, a lattice for TTs LT can be obtained.
4.2. Conversion from TT lattice to PA lattice
Our TT-to-PA FST is based on UniDic [ 19]. Of 876,803 Uni-
Dic entries, 873,647 were selected by discarding entries with
null pronunciations or unknown PAs. Lexicon FST construc-
tion followed [ 18]. Using the TT-to-PA converter represented
as an FST, a lattice representing distribution over PA sequences
can also be obtained by converting the TT lattice to a PA lattice.
This conversion can be done via FST composition. Let D be
an TT-to-PA FST, a PA lattice induced by the TT lattice can be
computed as: L′T2P = Opt(πO(LT ◦ D)). Furthermore, since
the dictionary D does not provide relative probabilities when a
word has multiple pronunciation, it is necessary to accumulate
PA weights toL′T2P. The PA probability can be taken from LP.
The pronunciation-weighted lattice obtained in this way can be
expressed as: LT2P = Norm(LP ◦ L′T2P). Here, Norm is the
normalization operator that normalizes the weights of outgoing
arcs for each state to satisfy the sum-to-one constraint.
The explicit conditioning method proposed in [ 7] is equiv-
alent to selecting the most plausible path from LT2P obtained
as above. Unlike the explicit conditioning method, our method
aims at robust decoding by fusing the estimation results from
LT2P and LP. Fusing the two estimators can simply be per-
formed by the union operator followed by optimization. The
union lattice ˆL can be computed as: ˆL = Opt( LP ⊎ L T2P),
where ⊎ denotes the FST union operator. ˆL corresponds to
the average of the two probabilistic distributions represented by
LP and LT2P. The ﬁnal recognition results can be obtained by
computing the shortest path over the union lattice.
5. Experiments
5.1. Experimental Setup
For analyzing the performances of the proposed systems, we
compared three variants of the method: the full proposed
method (MT+LF), a variant without lattice fusion (MT), and
a variant with neither lattice fusion nor multitask learning (PA-
only). Further, instead of lattice fusion, we implemented ex-
plicit conditioning [ 7] using our recognizers TT and PA output
results (MT+Cond.). For LF systems, the MT+LF system com-
puted the TT lattices using the TT outputs of the MT model. We
additionally compared LF method with other sources of TT lat-
tices. Whisper, and our “TT-only” variant were used as external
TT lattice sources. For LF with Whisper, the lattice was con-
structed to have only a single path corresponding to the recog-
nition result from Whisper. As side results, we also compare
character error rates (CERs) of the MT model, Whisper, and
our model without PA and fo outputs (TT-only).
For training, the CSJ dataset is augmented with speed per-
turbation [20] followed by a time-domain variant of SpecAug-
ment [21]. For speed perturbation, 20% of samples were mod-
iﬁed to have 90% rate, and another 20% of samples were mod-
iﬁed to have 110% rate. The time-domain SpecAugment is de-
veloped to apply masking as in the original SpecAugment but
in the raw-waveform domain. This variant implements time-
masking on the raw waveform, and the spectral masking on the
(full utterance) discrete Fourier transform domain. The hyper-
parameters for SpecAugment were set as follows: The number
of time-domain masks was 10, the number of frequency-domain
masks was 2, the maximum length of time-domain masks was
0.05T where T is the length of the input utterance, and the max-
imum length of frequency domain mask was 0.3F , where F is
the bandwidth of the input signal in mel. The task weights were
preliminarily set to 0.3, 0.6, and 0.1 for the PA, TT, and fo
tasks respectively. Those values are chosen from our expec-
tation on; (1) fo task is less correlated with the primary task
of phonemic transcription, and (2) the TT task is particularly
important because it’s training data is approximately ten times
larger than that of the primary task. The task weights were not
further tuned. The learning rate is scheduled using 40k steps
cosine scheduler (1k linear warmup steps) with a peak rate of
5e-4. The batch size was set to 128. All weights except for ones
in ”Speech Encoder” were optimized during training.
As baseline systems, we adapted Whisper [ 22]
(whisper-1 model from OpenAI) and Multipa [ 3]. Since
neither system is able to output our target PA directly, we made
adapters that produce multiple PA outputs corresponding to the
Whisper output text, or Multipa output IPAs. The minimum
error rates among all possible outputs from the adapter were
used as a ﬁnal metric for the systems with such adapters. For
2080
Table 1: Mora-label (PA) error rates [%]. ( † = the best output
is chosen from multiple hypotheses. See main text for details.)
eval1 eval2 eval3 JSUT
accent err. 3 3 3 3
Whisper† 20.6 24.3 15.1 19.7 13.5 16.5 2.8 6.8
Multipa† 17.2 – 19.8 – 18.3 – 16.2 –
PA-only 7.2 11.5 7.6 11.9 7.9 13.5 6.6 13.2
MT 4.4 7.3 4.9 7.8 5.0 9.1 5.8 9.9
+Cond 4.3 7.3 5.2 8.2 5.0 9.3 6.1 10.3
+LF 4.1 7.0 4.8 7.7 4.9 9.1 6.1 10.3
MT+LF with external ASR models
w/ Whisper 4.3 7.2 4.8 7.6 4.6 8.8 2.1 6.4
w/ TT-only 3.1 6.0 4.1 7.1 4.1 8.3 4.3 8.6
Table 2: Character error rates [%] of text transcription (TT).
eval1 eval2 eval3 JSUT
Whisper 18.9 17.2 15.1 8.3
TT-only 4.6 5.4 5.6 17.8
MT 6.3 6.8 7.8 22.6
the Whisper adapter, since our adapter is based on UniDic, the
adapter can also output PAs with accent markers based on the
accent annotation given for each word in UniDic.
For evaluation, two datasets with accent annotations were
employed. Since our model training is dependent on CSJ, core
subsets of CSJ evaluation sets were used as our primary eval-
uation sets (CSJ eval1/ eval2/ eval3). In addition to CSJ, “ba-
sic5000” from the JSUT corpora was used [ 23]. This dataset
(JSUT) contains read utterances from a single speaker. CSJ’s
spontaneous and multi-speaker properties align more to our ob-
jective; however, JSUT is also important for probing the behav-
ior of our methods in out-of-domain settings.
5.2. Discussion
Tables 1 and 2 show the mora-label error rates (MLERs) and
CERs of the systems, respectively. MLERs were computed both
with and without accent errors. We observed that the generic
multilingual speech recognizer (Whisper) was not suitable for
our phonemic transcription task. Even though our ﬁnal metrics
for Whisper were optimistic, computed by choosing the opti-
mal pronunciations based on the reference labels, the results on
the CSJ evaluation sets were not competitive with our tailored
model. As discussed previously, this is due to the normalization
effect from the language model. Table 2 shows that Whisper
was also not competitive in CER. This was because CSJ utter-
ances contain a lot of speaker errors, which Whisper tended to
ignore. On the other hand, for JSUT, since this dataset contains
read speech without speaker errors, Whisper worked almost per-
fectly. In that case, if we could choose the pronunciation of each
Table 3: Mora-label error rates [%] of each task combination.
“noncore” means that the noncore subset was used in training.
noncore eval1 eval2 eval3 JSUT
PA-only – 11.5 11.9 13.5 13.2
PA + TT – 11.1 11.0 12.9 12.8
PA + TT 4 7.7 8.1 9.5 10.1
PA + fo – 11.8 11.9 14.0 13.7
PA + fo 4 11.8 12.4 13.9 12.5
PA + TT + fo (MT) 4 7.3 7.8 9.1 9.9
word optimally, the MLER can be very low (6.8%).
The Multipa results showed the difﬁculty of mapping pho-
netic transcriptions to language-speciﬁc phonemic transcrip-
tions. Spontaneous speech exhibits wide variation in its pho-
netic realization, making it difﬁcult to recover the phonemic la-
bels as accurately as native speakers do. This shows that the
generic multilingual phonetic transcriber is also not relevant for
obtaining phonemic transcriptions.
Comparing PA-only and MT, we showed that training with
the noncore subset was important. Our method can success-
fully leverage the noncore subset, which lacks accent annota-
tions. Improvements made by MT are transferrable to the out-
of-domain JSUT task, where MLERs went from 13.2% to 9.9%.
From the results of the decoding methods (“MT+Cond” and
“MT+LF”), it was shown that the lattice fusion was effective.
The outputs of “MT+Cond” suggested that explicit condition-
ing is fragile if the recognizer cannot recognize textual repre-
sentation of errors. We observed that neither decoding method
was effective in the JSUT task, due to the inaccuracy of TT
outputs used to compute TT lattices (see Table 2). This issue
was mitigated by introducing an external speech recognizer as
a source of TT lattices. As shown in Table 1, “MT+LF with
Whisper” achieved the best result for the JSUT task. Similarly,
since our “TT-only” model was better than Whisper for CSJ
tasks, “MT+LF with TT-only” showed the best results for the
CSJ tasks. Thus, we conﬁrmed that “MT+LF” approach could
further be enhanced if we had an accurate TT recognizer.
To further analyze how each task contributes to multi-
task training, we conducted comparative experiments over each
combination of auxiliary task. Per Table 3, most of the advan-
tage of multitask training is attributable to the TT task. The fo
task was ineffective if only an auxiliary task (PA+ fo rows), but
fo yields a considerable gain when comb