How Frequency Band Importance Affects Neural Network Predictions and
Human Perception for Speech Quality Assessment
Ada Lamba ID 1,∗∗, Donald S. Williamson ID 1
1 Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Ohio State University, USA
lamba.39@osu.edu, williamson.413@osu.edu
Abstract
Audio quality assessment models are often used for evaluating
speech enhancement and noise suppression approaches. How-
ever, recent work has shown that network predictions do not
always correlate well with human predictions. Explainability
could help developers and users of these tools identify poten-
tial error and data bias, which would expedite development. In
this work, we use Shapley additive explanations, partial depen-
dence plots, and perturbation analysis to determine the influen-
tial frequency bands for three quality assessment models. We
then conduct a listening study to determine if human percep-
tion is sensitive to the same factors as these networks. Our re-
sults show that both networks and humans are more sensitive to
detrimental factors than beneficial ones. Further, the networks
focus on a small portion of the input which corresponds to low
frequency bands. Our work represents a step towards unifying
explainability for both humans and networks.
Index Terms: speech assessment, quality assessment, explain-
ability, human perception
1. Introduction
Perceptual speech quality refers to how well a signal is per-
ceived and can be highly subjective. A common metric is the
mean opinion score (MOS) of a signal, determined by the aver-
age of human-rated quality scores (1 - very bad, 5 - very good).
Deep learning approaches are commonly used for automated
quality assessment and leverage a variety of architectures in-
cluding convolutional networks [1, 2, 3, 4] to those with self-
attention [5] or (bidirectional) long short term memory [3, 6, 7].
Recent works have also utilized semi- [8] and self-supervised
learning [1, 9].
While DNN approaches achieve competitive accuracies, the
networks’ predictions do not always correlate well with human
assessments [7, 10, 11], especially on unseen data [12, 13, 14].
As a result, investigation into how these networks make their
assessments is needed. Understanding the cause of this dis-
crepancy informs developers of the root cause of error instead
of blindly trying to improve accuracy. Other work in speech
explainability has been limited to either one model or one ex-
planation method which severely limits the generalizability of
these explanations [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Additionally, few
works incorporate human-based studies. We aim to further our
understanding of DNN decision-making for speech quality as-
sessment by looking at several explanation approaches for mul-
tiple networks and incorporating human perception through the
use of listening studies to determine the most influential fre-
quency bands for speech quality prediction.
**indicates the corresponding author.
Explanations can be local or global. A local explanation
elucidates model prediction for a single input while global ex-
planations describe model behavior over aset of inputs [16, 19,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. Local explanations are especially helpful
in post-hoc scenarios. For example, given a model that takes
patient medical symptoms as input and predicts a diagnosis, a
doctor may use local explanations to see what led the model to
its diagnosisin this particular case. Thus, local explanations
cannot illuminate general network trends. On the other hand,
global explanations assess an entire system and can evaluate,
for example, theoverallfairness of a model with respect to cer-
tain sensitive attributes. Compared to local, global explanations
provide a fuller picture of network behavior and can be used for
determining systemic issues (e.g., bias).
Global explanations are categorized as model-driven or
data-driven. Data-driven methods describe how specific inputs
impact model predictions, whereas model-driven methods fo-
cus on a model’s internal mechanisms (e.g., weights, activa-
tions) [21, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30]. Gradient-based approaches [16,
22, 23, 24, 25, 31] use partial derivatives to assign relevance
to neurons. Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) [16] and
Spectral Relevance Analysis (SpRAy) [31] attribute relevance
scores to input features during back-propagation which are then
visualized as heatmaps. LRP’s local explanations can be aggre-
gated into pseudo-global ones, while SpRAy’s qualitative expla-
nations require human interpretation [16, 31, 32].
Perturbation-based methods are a common approach to
data-driven explanations [26, 27, 28, 33]. Activation maximiza-
tion finds patterns in the input data that maximize the activa-
tion function for a given neuron [28]. Other global explanations
aggregate a set of local explanations. SP-LIME learns an in-
terpretable model which is approximately correct in the neigh-
borhood of given data point and then aggregates over a set of
inputs [21]. Two limitations to SP-LIME are that an optimal
solution is not guaranteed and it requires a locally-approximate
model to be trained for each input which is computationally ex-
pensive. Global attribution analysis uses several local expla-
nations to determine important input features and then normal-
izes and clusters these attributions to achieve a global explana-
tion [33]. Similar to SP-LIME, the aggregation of local expla-
nations is computationally expensive as these approaches have
to be repeated for many inputs and are ultimately sensitive to
sample selection. Shapley values [34] use game theory to as-
sign a contribution of each “player” (i.e., feature, input signal,
etc.) to the outcome and have been used for evaluating audio
prediction networks [35, 36]. However, the focus is typically
on data valuation and using Shapley to curate a dataset without
drawing conclusions on the network’s behavior with respect to
its input features.
While there has been significant work in creating expla-
7353
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2382
nation frameworks, studies proposing new approaches tend to
evaluate only their work on several networks, limiting the con-
clusions to their approach [16, 17, 18, 21]. Conversely, works
that aim to evaluate explanations tend to focus on several ap-
proaches for one network, restricting their conclusions to that
network [15, 19, 20]. In this paper, we use SHAP [27], partial
dependence plots (PDP) [26], and perturbation analysis to study
the influential frequency bands for MOSNet [3], DNSMOS [2],
and SCOREQ [12]. Common architectures for audio quality as-
sessment rely on convolution or attention [37]. Attention-based
networks are not as easily interpretable [38, 39] due to their
increased complexity, making convolutional networks a good
stepping stone. DNSMOS and MOSNet are both convolutional
networks that predict the mean opinion score of audio signals.
They are well-known within the quality assessment field and
were state-of-the-art at publication, providing a good baseline.
SCOREQ is a recent state-of-the-art which utilizes a more com-
plex architecture. Both SHAP and PDP have the advantage of
being easily interpretable and quantitative [26, 27, 32].
We present one of the first studies to investigate which fre-
quency bands influence speech quality across multiple networks
and approaches, while also comparing these results to human
perception. By investigating the determining factors for both
networks and humans, we help illuminate the cause of discrep-
ancy between human and network predictions. If networks are
focusing on different frequency bands than humans, then the
lack of correlation may be due to a different decision method.
Otherwise, the difference could simply be due to engineering
parameters. This work guides future AI development by using
human behavior to identify whether neural networks are follow-
ing human perception trends during decision-making.
2. Neural Network Explainability
2.1. Explanation Methods
Letfbe the model’s prediction function that we are trying to ex-
plain and suppose we have a set of inputs,{x i}N
i=1 where each
xi ={x i
m}m∈M is comprised of|M|features. Consider an ar-
bitrary featuremand the pair({x i
m}N
i=1,{x i
M\m}N
i=1)where
xi
m∪x i
M\m =x i. For brevity, we abbreviate{x i
m}N
i=1 and
{xi
M\m}N
i=1 asx m andx M\m , respectively.
2.1.1. SHAP
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanation) [27] is a local explana-
tion approach that measures the effects of a specific feature,
m, on model prediction for a single data instance,x. The
SHAP value for featurem,ϕ m, is calculated by retraining the
model on all possible subsets of features excludingm, denoted
S⊂M\mwhereMis the set of all features. The Shap-
ley value for featuremis then the weighted average of the
difference between the model’s output including the feature,
fS∪{m}(x), and excluding the feature,f S(x):
ϕm = P
S⊂M\m
|S|!(|M|−|S|−1)!
|M|!
 
fS∪{m}(xS∪{m})−f S(xS)

(1)
To be “additive”, the sum of SHAP values for all features must
approximate the outputf(x)of the model being explained.
SHAP values are an implementation of Shapley values such
that SHAP (1) is locally accurate: the output of the explana-
tion model must match the output of the original model; (2)
has missingness: if a feature is not present in the input, it has
a SHAP value of 0; and (3) is consistent: if a contributing fea-
ture’s value in an input stays the same or increases, the SHAP
value for that feature should not decrease. The equations for
each of these properties can be found in [27].
2.1.2. Partial Dependence Plots
Partial dependence plots (PDPs) summarize how the model’s
prediction,f, changes in response to different input values of
a specified feature,m. We describe the partial dependence of
f(x)onm, denoted as bfm(xm), by the expectation off(x)
over the inputs excluding featurem.
bfm(xm) = E xM\m [f(x)](2)
=
Z
f(x m,x M\m )pxM\m (xM\m )dxM\m (3)
wherep xM\m (xM\m )is the marginal probability density of
xM\m , i.e.,p M\m (xM\m ) =
R
p(x)dxm, wherep(x)is the
joint density for all input features.p xM\m (xM\m )can be es-
timated by averagingf(x m,x M\m )over each data point in
xM\m . This allows us to rewrite Equation (3) as
bfm(xm) = 1
N
NX
i=1
f(x m,x M\m )(4)
The PDP curve for featuremresults from evaluating
f(x m,x M\m )and averaging out each feature inx M\m .
2.1.3. Perturbation
In perturbation (or sensitivity) analysis, we measure the effect
of an input variable by making a minimal change and observing
the change in the resulting output. In our experiments, we in-
vestigate how modifying the average magnitude of a frequency
band impacts model prediction of speech quality. For each input
signal, we select a single frequency band and scale the power at
each time frame by a constant factor (0.25, 0.5, 10, 50, 100, or
1000). The perturbed signals were then converted back to the
time domain using the same phase as the original signal. Only
one frequency band at a time is altered, and we discuss the fre-
quency bands chosen for modification in section 2.4.
2.2. Models
MOSNet-CNN[3] (hereafter referred to as MOSNet) is a 17-
layer convolutional regression network that predicts the mean
opinion score of a signal. Using the original implementation 1,
we retrained MOSNet to take as input a magnitude spectrogram
with 161 frequency bands (as opposed to the original 257). The
output of the model is the predicted utterance-level MOS, al-
though frame-wise scores can be taken from the penultimate
layer. MOSNet was retrained to accept 161 frequency bands as
input to promote comparison with other networks in this work
as each has features corresponding to 50 Hz-wide frequency
bands. Retraining MOSNet to accept an input spectrogram with
161 frequency bands instead of 257 did not lead to substantial
performance changes. MOSNet was trained on VCC-2018 [40]
and the original authors’ network weights were used.
DNSMOS[2] is a 14-layer convolutional regression model
that predicts speech quality, background noise quality, and over-
all audio quality. For this work, we are only interested in
1https://github.com/lochenchou/MOSNet
7354
Table 1:Mean squared error (MSE), linear correlation coeffi-
cient (LCC), and Spearman rank correlation coefficient (SRCC)
performance baselines for DNSMOS, MOSNet, SCOREQ on the
IUCOSINE test set.
Model MSE(↓)LCC(↑)SRCC(↑)
DNSMOS0.38900.2317 0.1981
MOSNet 0.5248 0.1877 0.1981
SCOREQ 0.46240.6283 0.6249
the overall audio quality (MOS) prediction. We use the orig-
inal implementation and network weights2 of DNSMOS which
was trained on the DNS-Challenge dataset [41] and takes a log
power spectrogram with 161 frequency bands as input.
SCOREQ[12] is a variant of the wav2vec 2.0 architec-
ture [42] which utilizes a triplet loss and contrastive training
to finetune the wav2vec 2.0 transformer. Wav2vec 2.0 is com-
prised of a multi-layer convolutional feature encoder followed
by a transformer and quantization module. SCOREQ follows a
two-step approach in which the encoder and a projection head
are first trained using the SCOREQ triplet loss. In the next step,
wav2vec 2.0’s encoder and transformer are frozen while an L2
loss trains a linear MOS prediction head. SCOREQ was trained
on the NISQA TRAIN SIM set [5] and the original authors’
implementation and network weights were used3.
2.3. Dataset
All models in this work were trained on the data used in the
original implementations. To prevent any network from hav-
ing the unfair advantage in our analyses of being tested on a
dataset seen during training, we use a speech quality dataset that
does not overlap with any dataset the models were trained on.
Dong and Williamson [43] performed a human-subject listening
study to collect MOS ratings for audio clips from the COnver-
sational Speech In Noisy Environments (COSINE) corpus [44].
COSINE is a real-world dataset generated by securing micro-
phones in four places (mouth, shoulder, throat, chest) on human
subjects and recording audio as the subjects go about their day.
We refer to this dataset as IUCOSINE, and it contains 14,400
training samples and 3,600 test samples. The training samples
were used for instantiating and training the prediction models
and the test set was used for evaluation. To form the evaluation
set, we randomly selected 100 signals from the IUCOSINE test
set such that the distribution of true MOS for our evaluation set
matches that of the IUCOSINE test set.
Table 1 shows the baseline performance of each model on
the IUCOSINE dataset. All experiments were run on a 48-core
Dual Intel Xeon 8268s or NVIDIA V olta V100 GPU [45]. One
of the motivations for this work is the lack of correlation be-
tween human and network predictions [7, 10, 11], which is ex-
hibited in the lower-than-ideal LCC and SRCC values.
2.4. Selected Frequency Bands
Though the models’ input features span 161 frequency bands,
each with a width of 50 Hz, for brevity we focus our discus-
sion on just nine. We concentrate on these bands as they in-
clude key perceptual features (such as fundamental pitch) or
2https://github.com/microsoft/DNS-Challenge
3https://github.com/alessandroragano/scoreq
were chosen empirically from our analyses. All models were
evaluated on six common frequency bands: 3–5 (150–300 Hz),
31 (1550–1600 Hz), and 40–41 (2000–2500 Hz). Bands 3–5
encompass the modal range of young men and women (85–155
Hz±2.11 semi-tones and 165–255 Hz±1.7 semitones, respec-
tively) [46]. Band 31 was identified by Apoux and Healy [47]
as having high relative band importance for consonants. Bands
40–41 were similarly identified as highly important for vowels.
The remaining three frequency bands of interest were cho-
sen separately for each model based on the bands that re-
ported the highest average magnitude of SHAP values (i.e.,
the frequency bands which had the largest average impact on
model prediction), as discussed in section 4.1 and Fig. 1. The
empirically-chosen frequency bands are (14, 15, 26) for DNS-
MOS, (6, 12, 17) for MOSNet, and (2, 20, 21) for SCOREQ.
3. Human Perception
Given that speech quality assessment aims to match human per-
ception, it follows that humans and networks should focus on
the same factors. Therefore, we conduct a listening study to
determine if network behavior aligns with human perception.
For this IRB-approved study, 200 participants were asked to
rate the quality of signals that are organized into (original, per-
turbed) pairs, give their preference (if any) within each pair,
and indicate which factors affected their quality ratings. Pref-
erence tests, as opposed to a single-utterance test, are widely
used to facilitate comparisons between multiple situations (for
example, when comparing the quality of two signals with differ-
ent noise levels) and have been found to be more reliable than
single-score tests [48, 49, 50].
We perturb eight randomly-selected signals from our eval-
uation set, discussed in section 2.3. Of the eight files selected,
there is one signal each with true MOS 1 and 4, and three sig-
nals each with true MOS 2 and 3. Four of the eight signals
have female speakers and four have male speakers. The eight
selected signals were perturbed by scaling one of the selected
frequency bands (section 2.4) by 0.5, 10, or 1000. The scaling
factors were chosen empirically from the results in Figs. 3a, 3c,
and 3e as 0.5, 10, and 1000 predominantly define the shape of
the curves showing the effect of perturbation on neural network
behavior (section 4.3). The listening study presents one pair of
signals in each question. Each pair contains, in random order,
the original, unmodified audio signal and the same audio signal
with one frequency band perturbed to a specific scale. We refer
to the four pairs associated with a specific frequency band as a
“block.” The pair (source signal, source signal) is also included
to serve as an anchor question. Thus, for each source signal,
there are 60 associated pairs (four scales, 15 frequency bands).
Each participant is randomly assigned four blocks to rate (16
pairs), though the pairs are presented in random order. After
rating the quality of each signal in the pair on a 5-point scale,
participants are asked to select which signal they prefer.
Finally, participants are presented with four factors and
asked to indicate if the factor contributed negatively, positively,
or did not affect their rating of their preferred signal. The four
factors given are the amount of noise, loudness of speech com-
pared to noise, audio distortion, and type of noise. Each of these
factors were chosen to correspond to an acoustic property which
is known to affect quality ratings [51, 52] and is recognizable
within a spectrogram.
Participants were recruited via Prolific and screened to en-
sure all are fluent in English, have lived in the United States for
at least 5 years, and have self-reported normal hearing. The sur-
7355
vey was administered using Qualtrics. The mean survey dura-
tion was 17.9 minutes with a standard deviation of 7.5 minutes.
99 participants were female and 101 were male. The majority
of participants (131) were in the range 30-49 years of age and
predominantly identified as White (143).
4. Experiments
4.1. SHAP
SHAP values quantify the influence of an input feature on a
model’s average prediction. To determine which frequency
band has the strongest affect on model prediction, we calcu-
late the SHAP values for each of the 100 files in our evalua-
tion set, shown in Fig. 1. Positive SHAP values for a frequency
band indicate that inclusion of that frequency band increases the
model’s average prediction; negative SHAP values indicate that
inclusion of the frequency band lowers the average model pre-
diction. The actual SHAP value is not informative on its own
but rather it’s the sign and magnitude compared to other SHAP
values that matter. For example, in Fig. 1a, the average SHAP
value (blue bar) for frequency band 4 has a large, positive value
compared to the negative value of frequency band 0 or smaller
positive value of frequency band 3. Thus, including frequency
bands 3 and 4 as input features increases DNSMOS’s average
MOS prediction while including frequency band 0 decreases it,
where frequency band 4 increases the average prediction more
than frequency band 3 does.
The SHAP values for MOSNet (Fig. 1b), show that the
lower frequency bands are the most influential with the higher
frequency bands (>band 40) having very little effect on predic-
tion. Though less severe, DNSMOS and SCOREQ show similar
behaviors with the lower bands (<band 40) having stronger in-
fluence. Unlike MOSNet, DNSMOS (Fig. 1a) and SCOREQ
(Fig. 1c) are affected by almost all bands (i.e., having|SHAP|
>0). While MOSNet is largely unaffected by the upper bands,
for DNSMOS, a strong majority of these upper bands have a
negative effect and for SCOREQ, the majority of bands have a
positive effect (though lesser than that of the lower frequency
bands). In fact, DNSMOS having the clearest separation of low
frequency bands (<band 40) being positively influential com-
pared to the negative influence of the upper frequency bands
may explain DNSMOS’s superior performance (Tab. 1) as it has
been suggested by other works that lower frequency bands are
important for speech perception [53].
The left plots in Fig. 2 are an alternative presentation of the
SHAP data in Fig. 1. Instead of using the average SHAP value
for each frequency band, we show the individual SHAP values
for a single band, in this case, band 40. Each scatter point shows
the SHAP value for band 40 compared to the band’s average
magnitude across all time frames for each signal. The shape and
color of the scatter points indicate the (truncated) MOS value
that the model will ultimately predict for the signal. Though
we do not see a clear separation between SHAP value or even
average magnitude and predicted MOS, we plot the trendline
of the SHAP values as the black dotted line, which we use to
compare to the PDP results in the following section.
4.2. PDP
Next, we determine if the behavior from the SHAP explana-
tion (local) matches the behavior reported by PDP (global). The
PDP curves, computed across the entire IUCOSINE dataset, are
shown by the right-side figures in Fig. 2. The PDP curves show
that for DNSMOS (Fig. 2a) and SCOREQ (Fig. 2c), average
(a)DNSMOS
(b)MOSNet
(c)SCOREQ
Figure 1:Average SHAP values and average magnitude of
SHAP values by frequency band for DNSMOS, MOSNet, and
SCOREQ across 100 randomly selected test files. The bars indi-
cate the average SHAP value for a given frequency band: nega-
tive values indicate that the inclusion of the feature, on average,
decreases model prediction while positive values indicate an in-
crease in model prediction. The dotted line shows the average
magnitude of SHAP values across each band. Larger magni-
tudes correspond to stronger influence.
7356
(a)DNSMOS
(b)MOSNet
(c)SCOREQ
Figure 2:SHAP values (scatter points, left side of figure, colored by predicted MOS of the file) of 100 randomly-selected test files and
PDP curves (right) for DNSMOS, MOSNet, and SCOREQ. The Pearson’s correlation coefficient between the trendline of SHAP values
and PDP curve is given by the text on the right.
7357
magnitudes of approximately −20 dB or higher in frequency
band 40 decrease MOS predictions while MOSNet (Fig. 1b)
predicts progressively higher MOS ratings as the average mag-
nitude of increases.
The text on the right side of the figures shows the correla-
tion between the SHAP value trendline and the PDP curve for
each model. The correlation indicates whether the SHAP and
PDP explanations agree. Though the PDP curves were calcu-
lated for each of the nine frequency bands of interest, we only
discuss one band for each model here for brevity. Despite see-
ing similar trends in other frequency bands, we chose frequency
band 40 for discussion as it has the strongest (positive 