VoiceQualityGUI: A Tool for Word-Level Voice Quality Modifications
Harm Lameris ID 1, Alan Villamil2, Nigel G. Ward2
1 Division of Speech, Music & Hearing, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
2 University of Texas at El Paso, USA
lameris@kth.se, avillamilc@miners.utep.edu, nigelward@acm.com
Abstract
V oice quality profoundly affects the perceived pragmatic func-
tion and suitability of synthesized speech. However investiga-
tion has lagged, due to the lack of tools for exploration. To
address this need, we have developed a tool that supports mod-
ification of creakiness, breathiness, and nasality down to the
word level, using an improved version of the V oiceQualityVC
voice conversion system. Users can manipulate these properties
and experience how such local modulations alter the perceived
conversational meanings.
Index Terms: voice quality, nasality, voice conversion, control-
lable speech synthesis, pragmatic functions
1. Motivation
Prosody is known to be important in conveying pragmatic in-
tent. While the roles of some prosodic features — notably pitch,
speaking rate, and intensity — have been well studied, most
have not. In particular, glottal features — such as CPPS, har-
monicity, and creakiness — although known to account for a
significant amount of variance in pragmatic meaning [1], have
been under-studied, as have their perceptual correlates, notably
modal, creaky and breathy voice. For example, creaky voice
can serve as a turn-taking cue and can be perceived as detached
and uninterested, while breathy voice can be perceived as inti-
mate and invested, among many other functions [2]. Nasality
has also been shown to have a role in conveying various prag-
matic functions.
To date, such findings have relied mostly on unaided ob-
servations for hypothesis formation, plus confirmation through
controlled stimulus production by humans. Both are time-
consuming. We wish to support, in addition, the quick forma-
tion and triage of early-stage hypotheses regarding the functions
of voice quality features. As these features often bear meaning
only in specific temporal configurations with words and other
prosodic features, this requires us to support word-level mod-
ifications. We accordingly developed a simple tool to support
such interactive explorations.
Within this context, our proximate motivation for develop-
ing this tool was both the success and the frustrations seen in
[3]. In that work, participants used V oiceQualityVC to modify
the voice quality of utterances synthesized for a video game to
improve the pragmatic suitability. While that effort succeeded
in demonstrating the value of control of voice quality in the
post-editing of synthesized speech, it required the participants
to tediously hand-edit specifications of the value of each prop-
erty over each time range.
2. VoiceQualityGUI Tool
The graphical user interface (GUI) is shown in Figure 1. The
supported workflow is similar to the workflow of [3] and is il-
lustrated in Figure 2.
Before any manipulations happen, a zero-pass of the origi-
nal audio is performed, that is, it is voice-converted using zero
values for both the global pitch settings and voice quality set-
tings. This is intended to provide an initial version of the voice-
converted utterance with fairly generic prosody, as a baseline.
From this starting point, the user next listens and infers how
to adjust the global pitch settings to match the pitch and pitch
variation of the original audio.
Figure 1:A screenshot of VoiceQualityGUI. The example shows
pitch lowered and pitch variation increase to match the speech
of the original audio, and breathiness introduced for the first
three words.
874
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia

Figure 2:The components and workflow of VoiceQualityGUI
After these preparatory coarse adjustments, the user can lo-
cally adjust the creakiness, breathiness, and nasality on a word-
level basis, to any desired degree of intensity, by selecting one
or more words and adjusting the sliders. They then typically lis-
ten to the result, subjectively compare it to the original in terms
of fidelity to the pragmatic functions conveyed, readjust, and re-
peat. To support subsequent analyses, the GUI saves the mod-
ified audio and the time-aligned adjustments of the intensity of
each voice quality feature used to create it.
3. Implementation
This system leverages recent advances in the synthesis of
speech with variable voice quality. In particular, it uses a fine-
tuned version of V oiceQualityVC [2], a voice conversion tool
for the modification of voice quality by directly conditioning on
glottal source characteristics. Separate encoders, simple affine
transformations, were added for each of four glottal source pa-
rameters, namely HNR35, CPPS, H1–H2, and H1–A3. We fine-
tuned the open-source FreeVC checkpoint [4] for 45k iterations
with a batch size of 32 and a learning rate of5×10 −5, as ex-
plained in [2]. Since these parameters are acoustic and do not
relate directly to perceptions, these features are exposed to users
indirectly, in three combinations, designed to match perceptions
of breathiness, creakiness, and nasality, respectively, as detailed
in [2].
The data used by the model is the English-language part of
the Expressive Speech corpus 1, as it contains several datasets
with high expressivity, which we expected to include a wide
variety of voice quality-related characteristics. We selected au-
diofiles which had a prosody score, an automated surrogate of
expressivity that has a high correlation with human judgments,
of up to 0.78. We annotated these for the four glottal source fea-
tures at a per-frame level. These specific features were chosen
as they correlate with perceptions of creaky and breathy voice
quality. While nasality is less clearly related to these features,
1Z. Lin, J. Yang, J. Zhao, M. Liu, S. Li, and B. Wang,
“Decoding the Ear: A Framework for Objectifying Expressiveness
from Human Preference Through Efficient Alignment,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.20513, 2025
they were adequate to produce a fair approximation. The to-
tal duration of the audio files selected is about 17h20m. Pitch
and pitch variation were annotated on a per-utterance basis. All
features were z-standardized.
The GUI itself was created using thestreamlitlibrary.
Its main inputs are (1) a path to the audio source file with the
utterance that is to be modified, (2) a path to a target file featur-
ing at least 30 seconds of speech of the target speaker, and (3) a
time-aligned transcript of the speech in the source file.
4. Prospects
We have developed the first tool that supports research on voice
quality by enabling the creation of directly comparable stimuli
varying only in voice quality, while maintaining other aspects
of the prosodic delivery, with a high degree of control. By pro-
viding a platform for systematic investigation, we hope that this
tool will bring us closer to future systems capable of more con-
trollable, or fully automated, intent-driven synthesis.
Acknowledgement:This work was supported in part by the
Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number
FA9550-24-1-0281.
5. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools have been used to aid in the creation of the
figures, as well as for minor editing of the document.