RAF: Relativistic Adversarial Feedback For Universal Speech Synthesis
Yongjoon Lee1, Jung-Woo Choi1,∗∗
1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea
yongjoonlee@kaist.ac.kr, jwoo@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract
We propose Relativistic Adversarial Feedback (RAF), a
novel training objective for GAN vocoders that improves in-
domain fidelity and generalization to unseen scenarios. Al-
though modern GAN vocoders employ advanced architectures,
their training objectives often fail to promote generalizable rep-
resentations. RAF addresses this problem by leveraging speech
self-supervised learning models to assist discriminators in eval-
uating sample quality, encouraging the generator to learn richer
representations. Furthermore, we utilize relativistic pairing for
real and fake waveforms to improve the modeling of the train-
ing data distribution. Experiments across multiple datasets
show consistent gains in both objective and subjective met-
rics on GAN-based vocoders. Importantly, the RAF-trained
BigVGAN-base outperforms the LSGAN-trained BigVGAN in
perceptual quality using only 12% of the parameters. Compara-
tive studies further confirm the effectiveness of RAF as a train-
ing framework for GAN vocoders.
Index Terms: Neural vocoders, Generative Adversarial Net-
works, Self-supervised learning models, Perceptual quality
1. Introduction
Neural waveform synthesis, also known as neural vocoding,
aims to generate a speech waveform given features such as a
mel spectrogram or deep latent features. Neural vocoding is of-
ten incorporated in systems such as Text-to-Speech (TTS) [1, 2]
or V oice Conversion (VC) [3], due to its capability to separate
the task into simpler sub-parts of feature prediction and wave-
form generation. Moreover, neural vocoders are employed in
other tasks including Speech Enhancement (SE) [4] and Speech
Super-Resolution (SSR) [5].
Neural vocoding is essential in high-computation tasks like
TTS and VC, driving demand for efficient and high-fidelity
speech synthesis. As a result, there is a growing need for
vocoders that offer both efficiency and high-fidelity output. In
this context, Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based ap-
proaches have gained prominence for their ability to produce
high-quality audio samples in a single-step generation process.
This success can be primarily attributed to advances in discrim-
inator architectures, such as the multi-scale discriminator [6],
multi-period discriminator [7], collaborative multi-band dis-
criminator, and sub-band discriminator [8].
With the growing interest in zero-shot TTS and VC [9, 10],
the generalization power of vocoders to unseen scenarios has
been a key theme in vocoder research. BigVGAN [11] garnered
a successful scale-up of the generator, achieving robust perfor-
mance in both seen and unseen data distributions. AdaV ocoder
**indicates the corresponding author.
[12] incorporated cross-domain correspondence for few-shot
adaptation of vocoders to unseen speakers. Diffusion-based
frameworks [13, 14] have gained attention since they have high
capacity when it comes to the adaptability to unseen speakers
or styles. Recent advances in Flow Matching (FM) have further
improved the synthesis efficiency of diffusion-based vocoders
[15, 16, 17] by significantly reducing the number of sampling
steps required for waveform generation.
Despite these advances, improving the generalization
power of vocoders has often come at the expense of synthe-
sis efficiency. For instance, FM-based models tend to be com-
putationally slower than GANs and typically lose performance
if they reduce the number of sampling steps needed for gen-
eralizable waveform generation. BigVGAN [11] successfully
pioneered a universal GAN-based vocoder, though with dimin-
ished synthesis efficiency. To address these challenges, we pro-
pose Relativistic Adversarial Feedback (RAF), a novel train-
ing framework that enables GAN-based vocoders to improve
fidelity and generalization power while maintaining GAN’s in-
herent efficiency advantages. Our key insight is that utilizing
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) models to aid discriminators
in sample quality evaluation and enforcing pairwise discrimina-
tion can help generators fully capture the training data distribu-
tion and learn robust and generalizable representations, enhanc-
ing the performance on both seen and unseen scenarios.
RAF consists of two components: aquality gapand adis-
criminator gap. The quality gap quantifies perceptual distance
by leveraging pretrained speech representations and frequency-
domain metrics. This provides the overall advantage of our
framework, where the inclusion of SSL models as quality gap
elements specifically contributes to the increased fidelity or per-
ceptual quality on the source dataset and generalization to un-
seen data. The second component,discriminator gap, measures
the relative realness of the real waveform over the correspond-
ing fake waveform. Inspired by relativistic pairing GAN (Rp-
GAN) [18], the discriminator is designed to assign separate de-
cision boundaries for each real/fake sample pair throughpairing
rather than relying on a single decision boundary to discrimi-
nate all real waveforms from fake waveforms. RAF introduces
an adversarial objective for a discriminator to minimize the dis-
crepancy between the quality gap and discriminator gap, while
enforcing the generator to minimize the discriminator gap. We
find that this relativistic pairing-based quality gap minimization
enhances the performance of neural vocoders and generaliza-
tion power to unseen scenarios. Overall, our proposed method
has the following contributions:
• We introduce Relativistic Adversarial Feedback (RAF), an
adversarial training objective that improves performance on
both in- and out-of-distribution. RAF achieves this by mini-
mizing SSL model-aided discriminator gaps between real and
1317
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-646
fake waveforms using relativistic feedback.
• We show RAF’s broad applicability by applying it to three
representative GAN-based neural vocoders. Comprehensive
experiments across one source and four unseen datasets show
that RAF consistently enhances both in-distribution perfor-
mance and generalization to unseen conditions.
2. Related works and preliminary
2.1. SSL models in speech generative models
SSL models have demonstrated significant success in speech-
related tasks due to their strong correlation with perceptual
quality [19] and powerful generalization capacity [20]. Sim-
ilarly, [21] has explored various SSL models as intermediate
feature extractors in speech enhancement applications, demon-
strating their effectiveness in capturing perceptually relevant
acoustic features. [22] highlights the robustness of SE models
to unseen datasets when the training is guided by SSL repre-
sentations. Specifically, there have been attempts to incorporate
SSL features in training GAN-based speech generative models.
FINALLY [23] has a dual-path system that combines speech en-
hancement networks with WavLM [24] representations, lever-
aging effective GAN-based speech enhancement. Conceptually
related to our work, [25] proposes an ensemble of pretrained
vision models with the standard GAN discriminator to improve
the performance of image generative models.
2.2. Training strategies for improving GAN vocoders
Several studies have proposed methods to improve the fidelity
of GAN neural vocoders. PhaseAug [26] suggested differen-
tiable augmentation to solve the discriminator overfitting. Jen-
GAN [27] proposed stacked shifted filters to prevent aliasing
and reduce artifacts. These methods, while showing improve-
ments in in-domain performance, have been underexplored
across diverse domains. BigVSAN [28] proposed a Slicing
Adversarial Networks (SAN) [29]-based improvement of GAN
vocoders by applying soft monotonization to the loss function.
2.3. Relativistic Pairing GAN
Letybe a ground truth waveform,xthe input, such as a mel
spectrogram, andG(x)the predicted waveform. The training
objectives for the generatorGand the discriminatorDin Least
Squares GAN (LSGAN) [30] are given by
LG =E x

(D(G(x))−1) 2
(1)
LD =E y

(D(y)−1) 2
+E x

D(G(x))2
(2)
RpGAN adopts a slightly modified training objective where the
discriminator estimates the relative realness of the generated
sample compared to the ground truth sample. The training ob-
jectives for theGandDare formulated as follows:
LG =E y,x [f(D(y)−D(G(x)))](3)
LD =E y,x [f(D(G(x))−D(y))],(4)
wherefcan be flexibly chosen. There are two key distinctions
between RpGAN and LSGAN. First, RpGAN maps the rela-
tive fidelity between a ground truth sample and a fake sample
to a discriminator score, whereas LSGAN enforces an absolute
mapping (i.e., real to 1 and fake to 0). Second, RpGAN imposes
the non-separability of the ground truth sample with the respec-
tive generated sample by leveraging the scalar-fixed function
f, pushing the discriminator to assign an individual decision
boundary for each pair of real-fake samples. This pairing en-
courages the discriminator to evaluate samples relative to their
counterparts rather than against a global decision boundary, pro-
moting comprehensive coverage of the training data distribu-
tion [31]. Standard GANs, including LSGAN, do not couple
the ground truth and the predicted waveform; the discriminator
evaluates real and fake data using a single criterion, reducing
output diversity [31] and insufficiently capturing the training
dataset. It is worth noting that the idea of relativistic GANs
has been incorporated in a previous neural vocoder study [32],
however, the idea of relativistic pairing has been underexplored.
3. Relativistic Adversarial Feedback
RAF is a GAN training framework designed to minimize the
SSL model-aided discriminator gap through relativistic discrim-
inator feedback. It leverages SSL embeddings as perceptual
guidance for the discriminator, capitalizing on their strong cor-
relation with human speech quality and robust generalization
capabilities. Additionally, RAF promotes comprehensive cov-
erage of the training data distribution by introducing a non-
separable training objective, which encourages the discrimina-
tor to form individual decision boundaries for real/fake pairs,
resulting in a model effectively capturing the diverse nature of
data distribution. In this section, we begin by describing the two
core components of RAF: the quality gap and the discriminator
gap. We then present the full adversarial training objective, fol-
lowed by a discussion of auxiliary losses that facilitate stable
and effective training. The overall framework and the algorithm
are illustrated in Fig. 1 and Algorithm 1, respectively. We pro-
vide all source codes1 to reproduce the results.
3.1. Quality gap
We employ WavLM-large [24] and HuBERT-large [33] as SSL
models for quality gap prediction. WavLM incorporates masked
prediction and large-scale training on more diverse audio. Hu-
BERT uses pseudo-labels derived from offline clustering of raw
audio features. For WavLM, we use the last convolutional layer
as the feature extractor since it highly correlates with percep-
tual quality [23]. In the case of HuBERT, we utilize its 22nd
layer for our conditioning feature. This decision is based on
two prior studies that emphasized the critical role of phoneme-
related data in speech separation tasks [34], and indicated that
representations from HuBERT’s 22nd layer strongly correlate
with phoneme recognition performance [35].
The input waveform is first downsampled to 16 kHz us-
ing a windowed-sinc interpolation filter with a Hann window,
which is then fed to the feature extraction modelF s, where
s∈{W,H}denotes WavLM (W) and HuBERT (H), respec-
tively, to obtain latent representationF s(·)∈R B×T×C . Here,
B,T, andCstand for batch size, sequence length, and the
embedding dimensions, respectively. Using a reshape opera-
tion, the tensor is converted to the shape ofB,T×C, which
is thenℓ 2-normalized so that the output normalized represen-
tationsZ s(·)have unit norm. We then take the mean squared
error between two normalized embeddings given a generated
sample and a ground truth sample, respectively, resulting in the
quality gapQ s∈R B×1. The quality gap can be formalized as
Qs(y,G(x)) = 1
TC∥Zs(y)−Z s(G(x))∥2
2,(5)
1https://github.com/infected4098/
Relativistic-Adversarial-Feedback
1318
M-STFT
Quality gap
WavLM HuBERT
(a)
HuBERT
M-STFT
WavLM
(b)
Non-separable 
Discriminator gap
Shared parameter Generator objective
Discriminator objective
Figure 1:Overall framework of the RAF . (a) represents the process of deriving the non-separable discriminator gap and quality gap.
(b) represents the training objectives for the generator and the discriminator.ϕdenotes the mel transformation.idenotes the data
index.
where∥·∥ 2 represents the 2-norm of a tensor along its chan-
nel dimension. Due to normalization, this distance effectively
behaves like the negative cosine similarity over the flattened
representation dimensionT×C, capturing perceptual discrep-
ancies in the embedding space. Yet, since both WavLM and
HuBERT operate at a 16 kHz sampling rate, the predicted qual-
ity gap is incomplete for evaluating waveforms sampled at rates
above 16 kHz, which are common in TTS or VC. To address this
limitation and capture the spectral patterns of multiple view-
points, we incorporate the Multi-resolution Short-Time Fourier
Transform (M-STFT) [36] distance without downsampling op-
erations as a complementary metric. The M-STFT distanceQM
is computed as
QM(y,G(x)) =
PX
p=1
h
L(p)
sc (y,G(x)) +L (p)
mag(y,G(x))
i
,(6)
wherePdenotes the number of STFT resolution config-
urations. Subscriptsscandmagdenote spectral convergence
loss and magnitude loss [37], respectively. We selected win-
dow sizes of [256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096] and employed hop
sizes equal to one-quarter of the respective window size. Fi-
nally, we concatenate the individual quality gap estimators to
construct the quality gapQ(y,G(x)). To ensure all quality gap
estimators contribute on a comparable scale, we introduce scal-
ing hyperparameters[α W,α H,α M].
Q(y,G(x)) = [α WQW, αHQH, αMQM]∈R B×3 (7)
3.2. Discriminator gap
Since the quality gap reflects how fake samples are relatively
inferior to ground truth samples, we define the discriminator
gap as the difference betweenD(G(x))andD(y), transformed
by a functionf. We adopted thef(x) =−log(1 +e −x)for the
discriminator gap [38] since it satisfied the necessary condition
forf[31]. Then we defined the discriminator gap as follows:
d(y,G(x)) =−f(D(G(x))−D(y))∈R B×3 (8)
This gap produces a discriminator gap that functions as
softplus(D(y)−D(G(x))). Softplus is particularly effective
for our task and offers several notable advantages over other ac-
tivations since it guarantees the non-negativity of the discrimi-
nator gap, leading to a stable approximation of the quality gap.
The discriminator’s output layer is extended to match the num-
ber of quality gap components (three). The discriminator’s out-
put nodes are each intended to implicitly model the quality gaps
of WavLM, HuBERT, and M-STFT, respectively.
3.3. Adversarial training objective
The discriminator loss function is a mean-squared error be-
tweend(y,G(x))andQ(y,G(x)). Since we pair the real and
fake waveforms ind(y,G(x)), we can induce pairwise approx-
imation of the discriminator gap to the quality gap.
Ladv(D;G) =E y,x
h
∥d(y,G(x))−Q(y,G(x))∥ 2
2
i
(9)
Next, we define the generator loss that enforces the discrimi-
nator gap to decrease as equation 10. The iterative adversarial
training ultimately minimizes the quality gap between the real
and fake waveforms.
Ladv(G;D) =E y,x
h
d(y,G(x))
i
(10)
Our framework is conceptually similar to MetricGAN [39]
in that the adversarial objective optimizes perceptual quality
metrics, but differs by using a relativistic pairing of real and
fake waveforms and by leveraging SSL models to aid discrim-
inators for generalizable quality gap estimation. The detailed
explanations on distinctions can be found in the section 4.2.
3.4. Zero-centered gradient penalty
RpGAN-GP [38] showed that applying zero-centered gradient
penalty (0-GP) [40] on both the real and fake data helps sta-
ble convergence of RpGANs. For this reason, we integrate 0-
GP to facilitate stable convergence of RAF. The mathematical
formulations of the gradient penalty for real and fake data are
described as
R1(D) =γE y
h
∥∇yD∥2
2
i
(11)
R2(D;G) =γE G(x)
h
∥∇G(x)D∥2
2
i
(12)
Here,R 1 andR 2 regularize the gradient norm ofDon real and
fake data, respectively. They penalize the GAN training such
that the discriminator’s gradient norm becomes zero when the
true and fake distributions are identical. The scale hyperparam-
eterγcontrols the degree of regularization.
1319
Segment size (# samples)
Estimation error
Score
Embedding
Quality Gap
8,192 16,384 24,576 32,768 
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 2:An illustration of the effect of segment size on quality
estimation error.
3.5. Mel reconstruction and feature matching loss
To increase the training stability, we append the mel spectro-
gram loss and feature matching loss to the generator loss fol-
lowing previous works [6, 7]. The mel spectrogram loss is de-
fined as equation 13 whereϕdenotes the transformation of a
waveform into a mel spectrogram.
Lmel(G) =E y,x
h
∥ϕ(y)−ϕ(G(x))∥ 1
i
(13)
The feature matching loss minimizes the difference of in-
termediate features in the discriminator given ground truth and
fake samples. For intermediate featuresD l∈R B×Nl from the
l-th layer of the discriminator (l∈ {1,···, L}), the feature
matching loss is given by
LFM(G;D) =E y,x
h LX
l=1
1
Nl
∥Dl(y)−D l(G(x))∥1
i
(14)
The final reconstruction objective is constructed by sum-
ming three weighted losses, withλ FM = 1, andλ mel = 26.
Lrecon =λ FMLFM(G;D)+λ melLmel(G)(15)
3.6. Final loss
The final training objectives are defined in equations 16 and 17.
We apply the gradient penalty every 7 steps to maintain a bal-
ance between the training efficiency and effective penalization.
L(G) =L adv(G;D) +L recon(G)(16)
L(D) =L adv(D;G) +R 1(D) +R 2(D;G)(17)
3.7. Effect of segment size on quality estimation
The waveform segment size for RAF training is crucial as short
segments mislead quality gap predictions fromQ(y,G(x)),
causing ineffective training. To verify this, we measured qual-
ity estimation differences across segment sizes using 10K Lib-
riTTS samples. Figure 2 shows three metrics:Score(differ-
ence in SCOREQ-predicted MOS between full-length and seg-
mented waveforms),Embedding(SCOREQ embedding dis-
tance), andQuality Gap(predicted quality gapQdifferences
between full-length and segmented real/fake pairs). Specifically
forEmbedding, we computed the L2 norm of the features from
the last layer of SCOREQ. Figure 2 shows that estimation error
decreases with increasing segment size, with the steepest de-
cline from 8,192 to 16,384 samples. We chose 24,576 samples
to balance training efficiency and quality estimation accuracy.
Algorithm 1Relativistic Adversarial Feedback (RAF) Training
Algorithm
Require:GeneratorG, DiscriminatorD
Require:Training dataset{(x i,y i)}N
i=1 wherex i is mel spec-
trogram,y i is ground truth waveform
Require:Hyperparametersα W,α H,α M,γ
Require:Loss weightsλ FM,λ mel
Require:Batch sizeB, learning ratelr
1:Load pretrained SSL models and freeze
2:foreach iterationdo
3:Sample batch{(x,y)}of sizeBfrom training dataset
4:Generate fake waveforms:G(x)
5:Compute quality gap:Q(y,G(x))
6:Compute discriminator gap:d(y,G(x))
7:Compute discriminator adversarial loss:L adv(D;G)
8:ifiteration mod 7 == 0then
9:Compute gradient penalties:R 1(D),R 2(D;G)
10:L(D) =L adv(D;G) +R 1(D) +R 2(D;G)
11:else
12:L(D) =L adv(D;G)
13:end if
14:Update discriminator:D←D−lr·∇ DL(D)
15:Compute generator adversarial loss:L adv(G;D)
16:Compute auxiliary losses:L mel(G),L FM(G;D)
17:Compute reconstruction loss:L recon(G) =
λmelLmel(G) +λ FMLFM(G;D)
18:Compute total generator loss:L(G) =L adv(G;D) +
Lrecon(G)
19:Update generator:G←G−lr·∇ GL(G)
20:end for
21:returnTrained generatorGand discriminatorD
4. Experiments
4.1. Baseline methods
To evaluate the effectiveness and applicability of the RAF train-
ing objectives, we conducted experiments using our adversarial
loss functions on different GAN-based neural vocoders: BigV-
GAN [11], HiFi-GAN [7], V ocos [41]. BigVGAN is a large-
scale universal neural vocoder that achieves competitive per-
formance across various out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios.
We employed BigVGAN-base, a smaller variant with fewer
parameters, to demonstrate the seminal role of loss functions
in improving the performance. HiFi-GAN is one of the most
widely adopted vocoders, balancing synthesis efficiency and fi-
delity. Our experiments utilized HiFi-GAN (v1). V ocos gen-
erates spectral coefficients rather than directly estimating time-
domain signals, thereby improving inference speed while main-
taining perceptual quality. We employed various combina-
tions of discriminators to train GAN-based neural vocoders.
Following [11] and [41], for BigVGAN and V ocos, we uti-
lized the multi-resolution discriminator (MRD) [42] and multi-
period discriminator (MPD) [7]. For HiFi-GAN, we utilized
the multi-scale discriminator (MSD) [6] and MPD, following
the original setup [7]. We used the original hyperparameters
for all experiments, except for the adversarial training objec-
tive. We employed BigVSAN, trained on Least Squares SAN
(LSSAN), to verify the effectiveness of our method against dif-
ferent approach to improve GAN neural vocoders. Addition-
ally, we incorporated WaveFM [16], an effective and efficient
flow-matching [43] based model as a baseline. We utilized the
checkpoints for both 1-step and 6-step inference.
1320
4.2. Distinctions from MetricGAN
(a) MetricGAN
-
RAF
-
v1
 (b) MetricGAN
-
RAF
-
v2
 (c) RAF
-
2
 0
 2
 4
 6
 -
2
 0
 2
 4
 6
 -
2
 0
 2
 4
 6
-
2
 0
 2
 4
 6
 -
2
 0
 2
 4
 6
 -
2
 0
 2
 4
 6
-
2
 0
 2
 4
 6
 -
2
 0
 2
 4
 6
 -
2
 0
 2
 4
 6
Epoch 1
Epoch 500
Epoch 1000
Figure 3:Toy experiments following [31]. (a), (b), and (c) rep-
resent the training process of MetricGAN-RAF-v1, MetricGAN-
RAF-v2, and RAF for two-cluster data, respectively. True data
are red, and fake data are blue. RAF escapes mode collapse
more quickly than the other training objectives.
MetricGAN [39] pioneered the direct optimization of per-
ceptual speech quality metrics. However, MetricGAN’s dis-
criminator is inherently a prediction model of normalized PESQ
bounded to[0,1]. To directly adapt MetricGAN to the proposed
quality metricsQ, we first develop a baseline replacing its sig-
moid activation with softplus to handleQwith[0,∞), while
concatenating ground truthyand the generatedG(x)as paired
inputs to the discriminator. We denote this as MetricGAN-RAF-
v1. The adversarial training objective of MetricGAN-RAF-v1
is described as follows:
Ladv(D;G) =E y,x
h
(D(y,y)−Q(y,y)) 2
+ (D(G(x),y)−Q(G(x),y)) 2
i (18)
Ladv(G;D) =E x
h
(D(G(x),y)) 2
i
(19)
This direct extension preserves MetricGAN’s paired architec-
ture but failed to deliver stable performance in our experiments.
Recognizing these limitations, we developed MetricGAN-RAF-
v2, which decouples the inputs to enable independent evaluation
ofyandG(x). The evaluation outputD(G(x))is directly used
as the objective to approximateQ. The MetricGAN-RAF-v2
training objective is mathematically described as follows:
Ladv(D;G) =E y,x
h
(D(y)) 2
+ (D(G(x))−Q(y,G(x))) 2
i (20)
Ladv(G;D) =E x
h
(D(G(x)))2
i
(21)
RAF further refines MetricGAN-RAF-v2 by introducing ex-
plicit sample pairing in the relativistic loss to increase sample
diversity, thereby promoting generalization beyond gap approx-
imation. To illustrate the distinction, we conduct a 1D toy ex-
periment following Sun et al. [31] in Figure 3. The problem
is a 1-dimensional generation problem where rea