Cross-linguistic word-medial stop lenition: A Functional PCA approach
Seung Suk Lee ID 1,∗,∗∗, Morgan Sonderegger ID 1,∗,∗∗, Meghan Clayards ID 1,∗,∗∗
1 McGill University, Canada
seung.suk.lee@mcgill.ca, morgan.sonderegger@mcgill.ca, meghan.clayards@mcgill.ca
Abstract
Stop lenition between vowels is pervasive, yet fundamen-
tal questions remain: to what extent is lenition the same phe-
nomenon across languages, and does it serve a common func-
tion? Thecontinuity lenitionhypothesis proposes one: weak-
ened stops signal prosodic continuation and aid word segmen-
tation. Previous work supports this idea but has examined few
languages with differing methods, limiting cross-linguistic gen-
eralizability. We investigate word-medial continuity lenition in
large speech corpora across nine languages, using Functional
PCA of intensity contours to quantify the degree of lenition.
We find a near-universal tendency for word-medial stops to be
weaker, with voiced stops most consistent across languages.
Exceptions reflect language-specific phonology or corpus arti-
facts, supporting continuity lenition as a cross-linguistic seg-
mentation cue. Languages vary in whether weakening affects
duration and/or intensity, suggesting listeners must learn cue
patterns in their language.
Index Terms: corpus phonetics, lenition, functional PCA,
crosslinguistic phonetics, stop consonants, prosody
1. Introduction
Stop lenition is an umbrella term for changes in the pronunci-
ation of stop consonants where consonants are pronounced as
‘weaker’ [1]. Stop consonants are prototypically produced with
an abrupt decrease in intensity, forming a ‘dip’ as the articu-
lators create a complete closure that is sustained for a period.
When stops are lenited (e.g., pronounced as a fricative or an
approximant), the dip in the intensity contour is smaller and
shallower due to an incomplete closure, and the stop closure is
shorter [2]. While lenition is the most common type of variation
in how stop consonants are pronounced [1, 3, 4, 5], fundamen-
tal questions about it remain—such as how stops vary across
languages in the two common acoustic correlates of lenition.
Cross-linguistically, stops tend to be weakened between
two vowels within a prosodic constituent (e.g., a word or a
phrase) [1, 3, 4], and word-medial stops are shorter and more
lenited [2, 6, 7, 8]. This weakening effect of word position is
termedcontinuity lenitionin [9], to convey the hypothesis that
weakened stops signal the continuation of the ongoing prosodic
constituent for listeners [2, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11].
Continuity lenition is closely related todomain-initial
strengthening, another cross-linguistic tendency, for stronger
and longer consonants at the beginnings of larger prosodic con-
stituents [12, 13]. This typological tendancy for word-initial
consonants to be longer than word-medial ones was recently
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
confirmed in 43 out of 51 typologically diverse and understud-
ied languages [14]. Both phenomena have been argued to serve
as universal speech segmentation cues [15, 16], in line with per-
ception experiments (e.g., [17, 18]) showing that listeners are
sensitive to prosodically conditioned consonant variation.
While there seems to be a strong cross-linguistic tendency
for stops to vary systematically by prosodic position, languages
vary in the size of this prosodic boundary effect, its consistency
across stop types (e.g., nasal vs. oral and voiceless vs. voiced),
and in how consonantal strength is acoustically instantiated
[8, 15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. Previous studies have found that the
acoustic duration of nasal stops is shorter at the beginning of
a large prosodic constituent (Intonational Phrase) in American
English [15, 21] and Seoul Korean [22, 23], while [8] found that
Seoul Korean phrase-initial nasals show a more abrupt change
in intensity contour than phrase-medial nasals. [21, 23] have
argued these effects reflect nasals becoming more ‘consonan-
tal’ domain-initially and weaker and more vowel-like domain-
medially, consistent with the continuity lenition hypothesis.
Previous studies hint at a cross-linguistic universal of conti-
nuity lenition, with differences in its realization by language and
by stop type. However, previous studies have examined only a
handful of languages, typically with lab speech and differing
operationalizations of lenition, making it difficult to assess how
much different results reflect genuine language differences ver-
sus methodological differences. In line with other recent work
in cross-linguistic corpus phonetics [5, 14, 24, 25], we address
this using a unified methodology applied to large force-aligned
corpora of read speech [26, 27] and spontaneous speech [28]
across nine languages. To quantify the degree of stop lenition,
we propose an approach using Functional Principal Component
Analysis [29, 30] on intensity contours of intervocalic stops. We
plan to expand to more languages in the future.
We investigate the following research questions: (1) Across
languages, how consistent is the word-medial continuity le-
nition? (2) How consistent is it across stop types (voice-
less/voiced oral stops, nasal stops)? We hypothesize that all
word-medial stops are weaker than word-initial ones across all
languages, but that languages and stop types may vary inhow
word-medial stops are weaker: some may be shorter but not
more lenited in terms of the intensity transition (henceforth,
just ‘lenited’), while others may be more lenited but not shorter.
Given previous findings, we expect languages to vary more for
nasal [15, 21, 22, 23] or voiceless stops [20] than for voiced
stops.
2. Methods
Our data come from three speech corpora. GlobalPhone [26]
contains roughly 20 hours of read speech from 100 speakers per
3295
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1786
−15
−10
−5
0
5
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Normalized time
Within−token
median centered intensity
PCk
σk
 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
(a)Average within-token median-centered intensity contour for /VCV/
(black line)±0.25 SD of PC1 (colored lines), across normalized time.
EN
FR
GE
KO
PL
RU
SP
SW
TU
−0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8
Standardized PC1
Language
Stop typeNasal stops
Voiced/Lenis stops
Voiceless/Aspirated/Fortis stops
LenisAspirated Fortis
(b)Model-estimated marginal median standardized PC1 for nasal, voiced,
and voiceless stops across languages, from PC1 models. Dots and
whiskers show median values and 95% highest posterior density intervals.
Seoul Korean stop categories grouped as described in Sec. 2
language; we used data from 7 languages (French, German, Pol-
ish, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, and Turkish). LibriSpeech [27]
contains roughly 1000 hours of read speech from 800 Amer-
ican English speakers; we used a∼20-hour subset (99 speak-
ers). Both corpora were force-aligned with the Montreal Forced
Aligner [31]. The Seoul Corpus [28] contains approximately 24
hours of spontaneous speech from 40 Seoul Korean speakers;
the original transcription files were force-aligned as described
in [28]. We used PolyglotDB [32] to extract acoustic measure-
ments and query relevant tokens, finding 1.47m /V 1CV2/ in-
stances across 9 languages, where C was a nasal or oral stop
varying in laryngeal categories (lenis/aspirated/fortis for Seoul
Korean, voiced/voiceless for others) at a word-initial or word-
medial syllable onset.
To operationalize the degree of lenition, we measured in-
tensity at 10-ms intervals for each /V1CV2/ sequence. Previous
studies have operationalized the degree of lenition using various
aspects of the intensity contour, such as steepness of fall from
the preceding vowel, magnitude of fall, and steepness of rise to
the following vowel [2, 6, 7, 8, 11]. These differences compli-
cate comparison of the size of the word boundary effect across
languages. In addition, these measures assume the stop inten-
sity forms a clear dip below neighboring vowels, which is not
always the case for extremely lenited tokens; this has led some
studies to discard up to 10% of tokens [2, 6, 8], potentially the
most lenited tokens of interest. Our FPCA-based approach does
not rely on finding such extrema and thus avoids this limitation.
Using FPCA, we identified the primary dimension of vari-
ation in intensity contours of intervocalic stops. Since our data
included nasal, voiced, and voiceless intervocalic stops, which
differ in intensity (nasal>voiced>voiceless), we hypoth-
esized that the first principal component (PC) would capture
relevant characteristics of the intensity contour: how large the
intensity ‘dip’ was and how steep the transitions were. As a
first step, we registered consonant boundaries as landmarks to
time-normalize and smooth the intensity contours [30]. Inten-
sity contours were median-centered within each token to pa-
rameterize intensity change relative to neighboring vowels. We
performed FPCA on the intensity contours pooled across 9 lan-
guages, and found that the first PC captured both the size and
slope of the intensity transition (as discussed further below). We
quantified each stop token using its weight for this PC.
For statistical analyses, we fit two Bayesian mixed-effects
linear regression models per language—one for the inten-
sity PC (henceforth ‘PC1 model’) and one for the log-
transformed phone duration (henceforth ‘duration model’)—
using Stan/brms [33, 34]. We used flat priors for fixed effects
and weakly informative priors for random effects (Student-tpri-
ors for variances, LKJ(1.5) priors for correlations). The poste-
rior distribution of the model was sampled using Hamiltonian
MCMC (4 chains, 4000 iterations/chain, 50% warm-up). Full
model specifications and code are available at [35].
We used the models to test whether stop types (nasal,
voiced, voiceless) varied systematically by word position (ini-
tial vs. medial) in intensity and duration. For Seoul Korean, stop
type had four levels (nasal, lenis, aspirated, fortis). In present-
ing our results we group fortis/aspirated stops with voiceless
and lenis with voiced stops of other languages (see [8, 36]).
Both models included major covariates of intensity and du-
ration, including speech rate, place of articulation, neighboring
vowel height, and syllable predictability [1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11].
Continuous predictors, as well as PC1 and log-transformed
phone duration, were standardized within each language (cen-
tering and dividing by 2 SD), so that word-position effects are
on the same scale, allowing direct comparison across languages.
Models included three types of random effects: by-speaker, by-
word indexed with syllable position (e.g., /p/ vs. /t/ in ‘pata’),
and by VCV sequence (e.g., /ata/ in ‘pata’). We report mod-
els with random slopes for predictors of interest [37]: word-
position and stop type.1
Word stress is known to condition stop realization
(‘stronger’ articulation in stressed syllables) [38] and is con-
founded with word position in many languages (e.g. stress is
predominantly word-initial in English [39] and German). To
accurately estimate the word position effect we would ideally
include stress as a covariate in the models. However, stress
does not exist in some languages (e.g., Seoul Korean) or was
not available in the pronunciation dictionaries in the corpora we
used (GlobalPhone [26]). Instead, we conducted a supplemen-
tary analysis refitting our models for five languages for which
partial stress information was available (English, German, Rus-
sian, Spanish, and Swedish 2), to address the robustness of our
answers to the research questions.
1We also fit models with maximal random-effect structure and found
no qualitative differences.
2Swedish has lexical pitch accent rather than word stress. We use
‘word stress’ to refer to the lexically prominent syllable.
3296
FRGE
PL
RU
SPSW
TU
KO
EN
FR
GE
PL
RUSPSW
TU
KO EN
FR
GE
PL
RU
SP
SW
TU
KO
KO
EN
Nasal stops Voiced/Lenis stops Voiceless/Aspirated/Fortis stops
−0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2−0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2−0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Word−medial − Word−initial 
Standardized log phone duration
Word−medial − Word−initial 
Standardized PC1
word−medialmore lenited and shorter
more lenited but not shorter
not more lenited but shorter
not more lenited and not shorter
Asp.
For.
Len.
Figure 2:Model-estimated differences in marginal median standardized log duration (x-axis) and standardized PC1 (y-axis) between
word-medial and word-initial stops. Whiskers show 95% highest posterior density intervals. Color indicates whether word-medial
stops are shorter (horizontal whiskers below 0) and/or more lenited (vertical whiskers below 0), or both.
3. Results
Figure 1a presents the first PC, which accounts for 40.3% of the
variation in the data. The higher the value of PC1, the more the
intensity contour is shaped like the red curve relative to the blue
curve. This PC captures both the size and steepness of the in-
tensity transition. PC1 also distinguished stop types in each lan-
guage, in the order expected under our interpretation—nasals<
voiced stops<voiceless stops—as shown by the model predic-
tions in Figure 1b (computed using the emmeans package [40]).
To address our main research question, we computed the
difference between word-medial and word-initial positions for
each stop type using the PC1 and duration models. The re-
sults are presented in Figure 2. We found that most cases sup-
ported our hypothesis: stops were ‘weaker’ word-medially in
duration, PC1, or both. Almost all word-medial voiced (or
Seoul Korean lenis) stops were both shorter and more lenited
across all languages. In many cases, word-medial stops were
more lenited but not shorter: French nasal stops, Spanish voiced
stops, Russian, French, and Spanish voiceless stops, and Ko-
rean fortis stops. English and Swedish word-medial nasal stops
were shorter but not more lenited. There were only three excep-
tions to our hypothesis: Spanish nasal, Korean aspirated, and
Swedish voiceless stops. Spanish nasal stops showed no signif-
icant difference between the two word positions in either dura-
tion or PC1. Korean aspirated and Swedish voiceless were less
lenited word-medially than word-initially. Korean fortis stops
were also longer word-medially than word-initially, while Rus-
sian, French, and Spanish voiceless showed no significant dif-
ference between the two word positions in duration.
In our supplementary stress analysis, word stress was a
significant predictor for both PC1 and duration across all five
languages (English, German, Swedish, Russian, and Spanish):
stops were shorter and more lenited as onsets of unstressed syl-
lables, compared to stressed syllables (results available in [35]).
Importantly, Figure 3 shows that including word stress in the
models changed the sizes of word position effects but did not
make the effects disappear, except for Swedish nasal stops. In
this case, the word position effects on duration and PC1 were
already small, and disappeared when word stress was included.
4. Discussion
We investigated the effect of word position on different stop
types across nine languages. We first found that FPCA can
be used to characterize the degree of ‘dip’ in intensity con-
tours, distinguishing stop types in the expected order across
languages. We then investigated how stops varied by word po-
sition, in each language. In most cases, word-medial stops were
either shorter, more lenited, or both, compared to word-initial
stops. V oiced stops were the most uniform across languages:
consistently shorter and more lenited in 8 of 9 languages. Ef-
fects of word position on nasal stops varied more across lan-
guages, but no language showed a pattern counter to our hy-
pothesis, i.e., word-medial lengthening or fortition. Effects of
word position on voiceless stops also varied across languages,
though word-medial stops were mostly more lenited.
One potential limitation of our results is that, despite using
the same forced-alignment tool [31], there may be unrecognized
cross-linguistic differences in alignment accuracy, particularly
for highly lenited (or possibly elided) tokens.
Our results should also be interpreted with the caveat that
‘word’ is an approximation of prosodic structure: lexical word-
medial stops are reliably prosodic word-medial, but word-initial
stops may or may not be prosodic domain-initial. Some could
be at the beginning of a larger prosodic constituent (strength-
ening our chance of finding a word-position effect), while oth-
ers may be prosodic word-medial (weakening our chance), as
in suffix-like orthographic words in Korean, which are always
pronounced together with the preceding word [41]. This vari-
ance in what ‘word-initial’ means in our data introduces noise
into our word-position results rather than systematically bias-
ing them in one direction. Despite this, our results show a clear
cross-linguistic tendency for word-medial stops to be weaker
3297
Nasal stops Voiced stops Voiceless stops
ENGESWRUSP
−0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Word−medial − Word−initial 
Standardized log phone duration
Word−medial − Word−initial 
Standardized PC1
word−medial more lenited and shorter
more lenited but not shorter
not more lenited but shorter
not more lenited and not shorter
stress stress included stress not included
Figure 3:Model-estimated differences in marginal median standardized log duration and standardized PC1 (word-medial minus word-
initial). Crosses show estimates from models without word stress; circles show estimates from models including word stress. Whiskers
show 95% highest posterior density intervals.
than word-initial ones, suggesting the effect is robust.
The near-universality of word-medial weakening is further
supported by the fact that the four exceptions to this pattern in
Figure 2 each have explanations in language-specific phonology
or aspects of the corpus used. The exception of Spanish voiced
stops is consistent with [42], who finds that duration does not
vary by prosodic position in Spanish and argues this is because
intervocalic lenition is fully phonologized. The second excep-
tion is Swedish word-medial voiceless and nasal stops, which
we believe is attributable to an artefact of GlobalPhone’s pro-
nunciation dictionary, which transcribes word-medial sonorants
and voiceless stop geminates as singletons (consistent with the
debated status of geminates in Swedish: [43]). Since geminates
only occur word-medially in Swedish, this inflates the duration
and intensity dip of word-medial stops relative to word-initial
ones. Future work should correct for this issue.
Third, word-medial Korean fortis stops were longer than
word-initial ones. This replicates [44] and extends their finding
by showing that word-medial fortis stops are more lenited, de-
spite being longer, than word-initial ones. Fourth, word-medial
Korean aspirated stops were less lenited and not shorter than
word-initial ones. This is surprising given previous findings of
shorter VOT word-medially [16]. We speculate that this reflects
vowel devoicing after word-initial aspirated stops in Seoul Ko-
rean [45]: devoiced vowels are lower in intensity, making the
intensity transition from the stop to the following vowel more
continuous, and thus lower in our PC1.
Our results extend previous work in two ways. First, while
word-position effects on lenition, as measured by intensity dip,
have been established for a handful of languages [2, 6, 7, 8, 11],
we show these hold cross-linguistically, at least for voiced
stops—supporting the idea that continuity lenition is a plausi-
ble universal cue to prosodic segmentation, consistent with [14].
This matters for listeners: acoustically ‘strong’ consonants aid
listeners in detecting real [17] or learned artificial words [46],
and in parsing prosodically disambiguated syntactic structures
[18, 47, 48, 49]. Second, we show that languages vary in how
duration and intensity are systematically affected by word posi-
tion. This extends [14] by showing that duration alone is insuf-
ficient as a cue for segmentation, and suggesting that learning
plays a role, as speakers need to learn how intensity and dura-
tion are used in their native language.
One example is Seoul Korean nasal stops, which stand
out in the size of the word position effect on PC1, consistent
with previous studies reporting an ongoing sound change of
‘denasalization’ of domain-initial nasal stops [18, 23, 50, 51].
However, Seoul Korean is the only spontaneous speech corpus
in our sample; future work using a read speech corpus will be
needed to determine whether its larger PC1 effect reflects gen-
uine language-specific phonology or speech style differences.
Our supplementary analysis showed that word stress affects
stop realization in the same way that the word boundary does,
suggesting that the two effects are confounded. [38] has argued
that word position effects for American English voiced stops
are “mediated by stress”. Including stress in our models af-
fected the size of the word boundary effect, consistent with this
view. However, we speculate that stress and word position may
serve the same purpose as speech segmentation, to the extent
that stressed syllables are word-initial. In English, German and
Swedish, more than half of stressed syllables were word-initial
while almost no unstressed syllables were, and these were also
the languages showing the greatest shift in word position effect
sizes when stress was included (shown in Figure 3). Listeners
hearing a strongly pronounced stop in these languages thus re-
ceive a convergent cue to both word onset and stress.
5. Conclusion
We examined word-medial lenition across nine languages
in large force-aligned corpora, quantifying lenition using an
FPCA-based measure of intensity dip. We found a near-
universal tendency for word-medial stops to be weaker than
word-initial ones in duration and/or intensity, with voiced stops
the most consistent across languages and exceptions largely at-
tributable to language-specific phonology, supporting continu-
ity lenition as a plausible cross-linguistic cue to prosodic seg-
mentation. Future work will expand to more languages to test
how universal these findings are.
3298
6. Use of Generative AI
Generative AI was used to check grammar and compress prose
to reach the page limit, without changing meaning.
7. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Canada Research Chair #CRC-
2023-00009 and NSERC grant #RGPIN-2023-04873 to Morgan
Sonderegger, and SSHRC grant #435-2024-0996 to Meghan
Clayards.