An Approach to Simultaneous Acquisition of Real-Time MRI Video, EEG, and
Surface EMG for Articulatory, Brain, and Muscle Activity During Speech
Production
Jihwan Lee ID 1,2,∗, Parsa Razmara ID 2,∗, Kevin Huang ID 1,2,∗, Sean Foley ID 1,3, Aditya Kommineni ID
1,2, Haley Hsu ID 3, Woojae Jeong ID 2, Prakash Kumar ID 2, Xuan Shi ID 1,2, Yoonjeong Lee ID 1,
Tiantian Feng ID 1,2, Takfarinas Medani ID 2, Ye Tian ID 2, Sudarsana Reddy Kadiri ID 1,2, Krishna S.
Nayak ID 2, Dani Byrd ID 3, Louis Goldstein ID 3, Richard M. Leahy ID 2, Shrikanth Narayanan ID 1,2,3
1 Signal Analysis and Interpretation Laboratory, University of Southern California
2 Ming Hsieh Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California
3 Dept. of Linguistics, University of Southern California
jihwan@usc.edu
Abstract
Speech production is a complex process spanning neural plan-
ning, motor control, muscle activation, and articulatory kine-
matics. While the acoustic speech signal is the most ac-
cessible product of the speech production act, it does not
directly reveal its causal neurophysiological substrates. We
present the first simultaneous acquisition of real-time (dynamic)
MRI, EEG, and surface EMG, capturing several key aspects
of the speech production chain: brain signals, muscle activa-
tions, and articulatory movements. This multimodal acquisition
paradigm presents substantial technical challenges, including
MRI-induced electromagnetic interference and myogenic arti-
facts. To mitigate these, we introduce an artifact suppression
pipeline tailored to this tri-modal setting. Once fully developed,
this framework is poised to offer an unprecedented window into
speech neuroscience and insights leading to brain-computer in-
terface advances. The source code and data are available1.
Index Terms: articulation, real-time MRI, EEG, EMG, speech
neurophysiology, brain-computer interface (BCI)
1. Introduction
Speech production is a complex activity, originating from in-
tricate neurocognitive planning and culminating in coordinated
neuromuscular action and resulting aerodynamic and acoustic
modulation. While the acoustic output is the most accessible
modality for speech production analysis, it is an end product
of a complex chain of causal events. To fully understand the
mechanisms of spoken language production and build robust
biosignal-to-speech systems, it is beneficial to look beyond the
audio waveform and examine the causal physiological and neu-
ral substrates underlying it.
The physical realization of speech acoustics is governed by
coordinated articulatory movements of the vocal tract [1]. Sev-
eral tools to directly observe articulatory kinematics, such as
real-time magnetic resonance imaging (rtMRI) or electromag-
netic articulography (EMA), provide useful resources to un-
derstand the relationship between articulatory and acoustic out-
puts [2–17].
Preceding the articulatory movements is the electrical acti-
vation of articulatory muscles, some of which (e.g., orofacial)
can be captured by surface electromyography (EMG). EMG
has been used to study the timing of motor recruitment and to
*These authors contributed equally.
1github.com/lee-jhwn/multimodal-speech-biosignals
explore alternative communication tools to those with speech
motor disorders, such as in silent speech interfaces [18–27].
At the apex of this speech production hierarchy lies the
brain, where semantic intent is translated into physical mes-
sages via motor control of the vocal tract. Electroencephalog-
raphy (EEG) provides a non-invasive approach to measure un-
derlying brain activity with high temporal resolution, which is
essential for tracking the rapid dynamics of speech production.
EEG has been widely utilized to investigate the neural basis
of language and speech representation and the spatiotemporal
dynamics associated with speech processing critical to brain-
computer interfaces (BCIs) or brain-to-speech decoding sys-
tems [28–43].
To investigate the interconnection among brain, muscle
activity, and articulation, previous studies have attempted to
combine acquisition of these modalities. Lezcano et al. re-
port methods for synchronization of EMA and EMG during
speech production [44], while Friedrichs et al. explore tem-
poral co-registration of EEG and EMA [45]. Anastasopoulou
et al. probe concurrent recording of magnetoencephalography
and magneto-articulography to map between brain activity and
speech kinematics [46]. These studies, however, are limited to a
subset of these modalities and also do not provide the full view
of the moving vocal tract during speech production.
In this study, we investigate the technical feasibility of si-
multaneously acquiring rtMRI, EEG, and surface EMG during
speech production. This multimodal biosignal acquisition al-
lows for the concurrent dynamic observation of the major com-
ponents of speech production chain: brain activation via EEG,
orofacial muscle activation via EMG, and articulatory kinemat-
ics via rtMRI. To the best of our knowledge, this represents
the first attempt to synchronously record these three biosignal
modalities during speech production.
The simultaneous acquisition of these modalities presents
three primary technical challenges: gradient-induced electro-
magnetic artifacts, cardiac pulse artifacts, and myogenic con-
tamination. First, rapid switching of magnetic field gradients
during MRI acquisition induces large voltage transients in EEG
and EMG leads through electromagnetic induction. Second,
cardiac-driven motion within the static magnetic field generates
the quasi-periodic pulse-related artifact. Third, speech produc-
tion introduces substantial myogenic contamination, including
head and jaw motion that perturbs electrode contacts. To ad-
dress these signal contamination challenges, we implement a
1170
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-140
MRI Control Room MRI Recording Room
MRI Scanner
MRI Clock
MRI Computer
Optical Microphone
EEG Cap
(w/ EMG)
Stimulus
Screen
Audio Computer
BV Recorder
Computer
Stimulus
Computer
Optical Audio
Recorder
BV Sync/
Trigger Box
BV Amplifier
(BrainAMP MR)
BV Battery
BV BrainAmp
Adapter
Fiber Optic
*BV: BrainVision
MRI Trigger
Figure 1:Experimental setup for simultaneous acquisition of
rtMRI, EEG, and EMG, along with audio.
multi-stage denoising pipeline. Our preliminary results demon-
strate attenuation of these artifacts.
Such multimodal data hold utility for advancing both
speech science and technology development. From a scientific
perspective, it offers a window into the overall neurophysiology
of speech production, allowing researchers to investigate the
spatiotemporal dynamics from speech planning through motor
execution to the resulting articulatory movements. In the BCI
domain, these data provide articulatory trajectories even in the
absence of acoustic signal, useful for mapping neural activity to
articulatory movements in silent speakers. rtMRI also serves as
an observation tool for imagined speech studies, allowing un-
conscious micro-articulatory movements to be monitored that
could influence BCI performance.
2. Methods
2.1. Apparatus
The rtMRI vocal tract images are acquired in a 0.55T MRI via
a custom 8-channel upper airway coil using a spiral bSSFP se-
quence with TR set to5.05ms (99fps) with concurrent au-
dio recording [14, 47] using an optical microphone 2. The elec-
trophysiology signals are recorded using an MR-compatible
BrainVision system3. Signals are sampled at 5 kHz, synchro-
nized with the MRI clock via fiber-optic trigger. The 0.55T
field strength improves compatibility with electrophysiological
recordings [48, 49]. The device has 16 electrodes, 9 EEG (C3,
C4, F3, F4, FPz, O1, O2, M1, and M2), two EOG, three EMG,
and one ECG electrodes. The three surface EMG electrodes
are placed on the following locations of the face, near the mus-
cle areas correlated with articulatory movements [18]: chin cor-
ner, underneath the chin, and next to Adam’s apple. The EOG
(electrooculography) and ECG (electrocardiogram) electrodes
capture the corneo-retinal standing potential and cardio signals,
respectively, and are used for artifact removal in EEG signals.
2.2. Experimental design
The pilot study recording consists of data from one male Ameri-
can English native speaker, aged in his thirties, with no visual or
hearing impairments. There are three different types of speech
production tasks: fully phonated, silent, and imagined speech
production, each recorded under two different magnetic field
conditions (inside and outside the scanner). This paper primar-
ily focuses on the fully phonated task. For the phonated task,
the subject was instructed to fully produce the stimuli, and for
the silent speech task, the subject was instructed to do the same
without vocalizing. These tasks are repeated 12 times for each
magnetic condition. The imagined speech production was in-
cluded as an additional study, and consists of a subset of the
full stimulus set with only 2 runs. In this task, the subject was
2Optoacoustics Ltd., Moshav Mazor, Israel
3Brain Products GmbH, Germany
+ apa +
Word
1s
Production
2s
Fixation
0.5s
Recovery
0.5s
Jitter
0.5-1s
Eye
fixation
Stimulus
presented
Production of
the target word
Return to
baseline before
next stimulus
Randomized 
inter-trial interval
to prevent timelock
Figure 2:Stimulus presentation protocol.
asked to imagine producing each stimulus without any articula-
tory movements.
The stimulus set consists of 18 disyllabic nonce words with
a VCV structure, where the vowel is /a/, a selected subset from
[4]: [apa, ata, aka, asa, asha, ala, afa, ara, aha, awa, aya, aba,
ada, aga, atha, ama, ana, ava]. Prior to each unique speech pro-
duction task, a 60-second resting-state period was recorded dur-
ing which a blank screen was presented. Each trial followed a
fixed sequence: (1) a variable inter-trial interval (jittered) con-
sisting of a black screen with a duration randomized between
0.5, 0.75, and 1.0 s to prevent time-locking of stimulus onset
to the MRI volume acquisition cycle; (2) a white fixation cross
presented in the center of the black background for 0.5 s; (3)
the target nonce word presented for 1.0 s, during which the sub-
ject was instructed not to produce the word yet; (4) a Go signal
(fixation cross) lasting 2.0 s, signaling the onset of speech pro-
duction; and (5) a final blank screen for 0.5 s before the next
trial. The subject was asked not to produce the word in step (3)
to minimize visual interference in neural signals. The stimu-
lus order was randomized. The study was approved by the In-
stitutional Review Board of our institution, and the participant
provided written informed consent prior to participation.
2.3. Magnetic artifact removal
Simultaneous EEG recording during rtMRI is contaminated
by gradient switching artifacts (GA) and ballistocardiogram
(BCG) artifacts. We implement a two-stage correction pro-
cedure: (1) gradient artifact correction followed by (2) pulse
(BCG) artifact correction, both using template-based sub-
traction adapted from simultaneous EEG-fMRI preprocessing
frameworks [48, 50–52]. Magnetic artifact correction is per-
formed in BrainVision Analyzer 2 [53]. Data inspection and
visualization are conducted in Brainstorm [54].
2.3.1. Gradient artifact correction
Rapid gradient switching during rtMRI induces large-
amplitude, periodic voltage transients in EEG leads through
electromagnetic induction. Due to the strict periodicity of the
gradient waveform, gradient artifact removal is performed us-
ing average artifact subtraction [50]. Artifact onset markers are
detected from the EEG using a gradient-threshold method, iden-
tifying the start of each repeating artifact pattern aligned with
the acquisition cycle. For each repetition, a local artifact tem-
plate is constructed by averaging a centered sliding window of
repetitions, then subtracted from the data [50]. The sliding win-
dow accommodates gradual changes in artifact shape caused by
subject motion. Correction parameters follow the default set-
tings of BrainVision Analyzer 2 and are adapted to our rtMRI
setup [50, 53].
2.3.2. Pulse (BCG) artifact correction
After gradient artifact removal, residual cardiac-locked deflec-
tions are identified. R-peaks are detected from the simultane-
ously recorded ECG channel (low-pass filtered at 15 Hz) and
verified semi-automatically. An ECG-informed average arti-
fact subtraction approach is applied, in which cardiac-locked
1171
(a)Without EEG/EMG cap
 (b)With EEG/EMG cap
Figure 3:Comparison of rtMRI videos with and without the
EEG/EMG device.We observe no significant impact on the
articulatory regions of interest.
segments are averaged within a sliding window and subtracted
from the EEG signal [51, 52]. This procedure reduces ECG-
locked waveform components and attenuates bilaterally mir-
rored, polarity-reversed patterns across channels, consistent
with suppression of the BCG artifact.
2.4. Myogenic and ocular artifact correction
Residual myogenic and ocular artifacts remain in the EEG
signal, arising from speech-related facial muscle activity, eye
blinks, and eye movements, and may confound analyses by tem-
porally overlapping with task-related neural signals. To sup-
press these non-neural components while preserving cortical ac-
tivity, we applied reference-based canonical correlation analysis
(CCA) using EMG and EOG channels as references [55, 56].
EEG (9channels) and artifact reference signals (3EMG,
2EOG) were jointly decomposed using CCA to identify com-
ponents maximizing correlation between brain and peripheral
signals. Components exhibiting strong correlation with the ref-
erence channels were classified as artifactual and removed via
orthogonal projection of the corresponding subspace. Compo-
nents were ranked by canonical correlation (ρ) with the refer-
ence signals. Components withρ >0.4were rejected, sup-
plemented by visual inspection of component time courses and
spatial patterns [55, 57]. This resulted in removal of 2 to 5
canonical components per recording.
Effectiveness is evaluated by: (i) suppression of blink-
locked frontal artifacts synchronized with EOG activity; (ii)
attenuation of movement-locked artifacts synchronized with
EMG activity during articulation; and (iii) visual inspection of
scalp topographies for restoration of expected speech produc-
tion patterns.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Temporal alignment
The EEG, EOG, and EMG signals are acquired via a single sys-
tem and are intrinsically aligned. Given that MRI-audio syn-
chronization was previously established [14, 47], we inspect
the MRI-EEG alignment by comparing the total duration of the
MRI video to the interval between the scanner’s start and stop
triggers in the EEG recording. The average duration difference
is8.3ms/s (σ= 0.3ms/s), within the range of the frame size
of the rtMRI videos (10.1ms).
3.2. Influence of EEG/EMG setups on rtMRI videos
All of the elements such as electrodes and cords of the EEG
and EMG recording are MRI-compatible, hence there is no or
negligible effect on the recorded rtMRI videos. Fig. 3 compares
the rtMRI videos with and without the EEG/EMG electrodes,
and no significant artifacts from the EEG/EMG electrodes are
observed in the rtMRI images. A region of interest analysis on
(a)Raw EEG recording inside the running scanner.
1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Time (s)
200
100
0
100
200
Amplitude (µV)
F3
F4
C3
C4
O1
O2
FPz
M1
M2
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
Frequency (Hz)
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
1010
Power (µV²)
(b)Inside scanner condition after magnetic artifact correction.
1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Time (s)
10
0
10
20
30
40
Amplitude (µV)
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
Frequency (Hz)
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
1010
Power (µV²)
(c)Outside scanner reference.
1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Time (s)
10
0
10
20
30
40
Amplitude (µV)
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
Frequency (Hz)
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
1010
Power (µV²)
Figure 4:Magnetic artifact correction around stimulus onset.
Raw EEG recording inside the scanner (Fig. 4a) shows large-
amplitude periodic transients by gradient switching, which is
substantially suppressed after the correction (Fig. 4b), exhibit-
ing temporal and spectral characteristics comparable to the ref-
erence (Fig. 4c). Each row presents representative time-domain
waveforms (left) and corresponding frequency magnitude spec-
tra (right).
the tongue region yields an SNR of10.148±0.575, which is
within the bounds of expected SNR reported in [14], indicating
no significant quantitative impact on the recorded rtMRI videos
from simultaneous use of EEG/EMG electrodes.
3.3. Magnetic artifact correction
We address the effectiveness of the magnetic artifact removal
method (GA and BCG correction). We mainly compare three
different conditions: (1) Inside the scanner before any magnetic
denoising, (2) Inside the scanner after magnetic denoising, and
(3) Outside the scanner (no magnetic noise) as a reference point.
As shown in Fig. 4a, the raw EEG recordings inside the
scanner contain periodic high-amplitude transients and har-
monic spectral peaks that are generally not observed in EEG
recordings. After magnetic denoising, the high-frequency har-
monics are removed (Fig. 4b).
We also compare the ERPs of two-second windows, one
second before and after the onset of stimulus presentation. It
shows average temporal correlation of 0.66 (σ= 0.17) between
the inside and outside scanner conditions, especially higher cor-
relation at the frontal pole and near the language-production ac-
tivity (FPz, C3, F3 reaching around 0.82, 0.81, 0.78, respec-
tively). Note that this time window is prior to articulation of
words, before myogenic contamination starts.
3.4. Myogenic and ocular artifact correction
To evaluate the efficacy of the myogenic and ocular artifact re-
moval pipeline, we compare ERPs and scalp topographies be-
fore and after CCA denoising, as shown in Fig. 5. Prior to
artifact removal (Fig. 5a), uncorrected data show severe myo-
1172
(a)Before Myogenic and Ocular Artifact Removal
 (b)After Myogenic and Ocular Artifact Removal
Figure 5:Comparison of ERPs and topographies before and after myogenic and ocular artifact removal.Prior to artifact removal,
high-amplitude activity is heavily concentrated in the frontal region, indicative of artifact contamination. After the denoising pipeline,
this frontal dominance is substantially attenuated, revealing a distinct lateralization of activity over the left hemisphere, consistent with
language processing areas.
Figure 6:Micro-articulatory movements during imagined
speech.Snapshots of rtMRI videos during imagined production
of /ama/. Micro-articulatory movements are observed, such as
the velum movement.
genic and ocular contamination reaching roughly 60µV . Fol-
lowing the application of the reference-based CCA pipeline
(Fig. 5b), the underlying neural signal emerges, exhibiting left-
lateralized activation broadly consistent with prior reports of
speech-related cortical processing [58–60]. The correction sub-
stantially attenuates the initial contamination, reducing peak
amplitudes across most channels to roughly 20µV and sup-
pressing widespread myogenic artifacts across cortical frontal
channels such as F3 and F4. A localized residual artifact persists
at the extreme front of the head (FPz), likely reflecting mechan-
ical perturbation of the electrode during speech-induced head
motion. As the frontal pole lies outside primary speech and
motor networks, this isolated contamination does not obscure
the cortical dynamics of interest.
3.5. Micro-articulatory movements in imagined speech
We observe micro-articulatory movements during imagined
speech production, as shown in Fig. 6. Although the subject was
instructed to inhibit any articulatory movement, the data sug-
gest that such micro-motor activity persists despite conscious
inhibitory efforts, aligning with previous studies [61]. Our ap-
proach offers an objective means for detecting such subtle ar-
ticulatory motor activity during imagined speech tasks. Further
investigation is required to determine whether these movements
can be fully inhibited through training or if they represent a sys-
tematic, intrinsic component of the speech-planning process.
Regardless, our methodology provides a novel framework for
observing the relationship between imagined speech production
and micro-motor execution.
4. Future Potential Applications
Once fully developed, this novel multimodal methodology
promises advances in two major domains. First, it offers valu-
able resources to the BCI community, especially for speech de-
coding from neural or muscle signals. Decoding partially avail-
able forms of speech, such as silent or imagined speech, has
historically been challenging due to absence of audio ground-
truth and the inability to concurrently observe articulator move-
ments. By providing simultaneous articulatory kinematic, mus-
cular, and neural data, this framework establishes a physiologi-
cal ground truth even when no sound is produced, enabling the
training of such robust decoders that map neural or muscle ac-
tivity directly to articulatory movements.
Secondly, in the speech science domain, this multimodal
approach may help uncover the complex mechanisms of speech
planning and production. By capturing synchronous mul-
timodal biosignals across the speech production chain, re-
searchers can investigate the spatiotemporal coordination be-
tween neural planning, motor execution, and physical articu-
lation. For instance, this data could be pivotal in distinguishing
between feedforward motor commands and sensory feedback
loops, or in identifying the specific neural breakdowns associ-
ated with speech disorders like stuttering or apraxia.
5. Limitation
Despite the promising integration of EEG, rtMRI, and EMG,
several limitations remain, including the restricted generaliz-
ability of this single-subject pilot study and the technical trade-
offs inherent in the hardware. The MRI-compatible EEG elec-
trodes are passive electrodes, and noise level may be higher than
active electrodes. Also, the EEG cap is not specifically designed
for a study with our type of speech tasks, hence it may not pri-
oritize the capture of speech or language specific regions of the
brain, and it certainly has limitations in its spatial resolution.
Additionally, the limited EMG montage leaves some residual
artifacts. Finally, there may have been auditory and visual con-
sequences on neural activities due to the scanner noise and vi-
sually presented orthographic stimuli.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
This study demonstrates the technical feasibility of simultane-
ously acquiring real-time MRI, EEG, and surface EMG dur-
ing speech production. This novel trimodal framework takes
initial steps to bridge the gaps connecting neural activity, mo-
tor execution, and articulatory movements, offering a compre-
hensive physiological view spanning various aspects of speech
production. These capabilities pave the way for developing
more robust, physiologically grounded BCIs and can lead to
new insights into the complex neural mechanisms driving hu-
man speech.
We anticipate that the proposed acquisition and denoising
pipeline is generalizable to various MRI scanner types and high-
density EEG devices. Future work will focus on scaling this
protocol to a larger cohort of subjects and employing a higher
spatial resolution EEG device. Additionally, we aim to investi-
gate more linguistically complex tasks to fully exploit the mul-
timodal richness of this setup.
1173
7. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the US National Science Founda-
tion (IIS-2311676, BCS-2240349) and the US National Institute
of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering of the US National
Institutes of Health (R01EB026299).
8. Generati