SEMamba++: A General Speech Restoration Framework Leveraging Global,
Local, and Periodic Spectral Patterns
Yongjoon Lee1, Jung-Woo Choi1,∗∗
1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea
yongjoonlee@kaist.ac.kr, jwoo@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract
General speech restoration demands techniques that can inter-
pret complex speech structures under various distortions. While
State-Space Models like SEMamba have advanced the state-of-
the-art in speech denoising, they are not inherently optimized
for critical speech characteristics, such as spectral periodicity or
multi-resolution frequency analysis. In this work, we introduce
an architecture tailored to incorporate speech-specific features
as inductive biases. In particular, we propose the Global, Lo-
cal, and Periodic (GLP) module, a frequency feature extraction
block that effectively and efficiently leverages the properties of
frequency bins. Then, we design a multi-resolution parallel
time-frequency dual-processing block to capture diverse spec-
tral patterns, and a learnable mapping to further enhance model
performance. With all our ideas combined, the proposed SE-
Mamba++ achieves the best performance among multiple base-
line models while remaining computationally efficient.
Index Terms: General speech restoration, GAN
1. Introduction
General speech restoration (GSR) [1] refers to the task of re-
covering high-quality speech from signals affected by a range
of degradations, such as noise, reverberation, bandwidth limita-
tion, and clipping. This problem is particularly relevant in real-
world environments, where speech is often captured under ad-
verse acoustic conditions or with limited recording equipment,
resulting in multiple and overlapping types of distortion. Unlike
speech denoising or dereverberation that aims topredictclean
speech by removing noise or reverberation, GSR not only pre-
dicts clean speech but alsogeneratesthe missing speech frag-
ment so that the resulting speech is perceptually natural. This
fragment may be high-frequency bands in bandwidth-limited
situations or a high-amplitude signal in clipped scenarios. This
hybrid nature has led to various approaches to solving GSR.
Generative methods have been used for their high percep-
tual quality and versatility in generating missing speech frag-
ments. Universe [2] introduced score-based diffusion [3] to
solve GSR, on which Universe++ [4] improved using a hy-
brid of score-matching [3] and generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [5]. ANYENHANCE [6] is a multi-task masked
generative model (MGM) [7] utilizing prompt-guidance and
self-critic mechanisms to successfully solve speech enhance-
ment. In generative methods, language models (LMs) have
also emerged as a viable option due to their generalization ca-
pacity. MaskSR [8] is a masked language model (MLM) ca-
pable of restoring full-band speech with discrete acoustic to-
kens from pretrained neural audio codecs. LLaSE-G1 [9] ad-
**indicates the corresponding author.
dresses multi-task GSR utilizing a language model. However,
LM-based methods require substantial amounts of training data.
Surprisingly, discriminative methods, although thought to
be less perceptually natural and versatile than generative meth-
ods, yield impressive results in GSR. Discriminative meth-
ods [10, 11] achieved high performance in GSR challenges such
as URGENT [12] and AATC [13]. This success can be at-
tributed to architectural improvements and advanced training
techniques (e.g., improved loss functions) inherited from speech
denoising. CMGAN [14] introduced a Conformer [15]-based
encoder-decoder architecture with dilated DenseNets [16]. CM-
GAN used metric discriminator [17] with reconstruction losses
to directly optimize perceptual metrics. MP-SENet extended
this framework by introducing parallel magnitude and phase de-
coding. More recently, SEMamba [18] replaced the Conformer
with Mamba [19], leveraging its selective state-space mecha-
nism. For the aforementioned methods, separate feature extrac-
tion for time and frequency bins has been a key design; a proce-
dure referred to as time-frequency dual-path (TFDP) processing
in this work. Unlike the image domain, where the height and
width represent the same characteristics at different locations,
the time and frequency bins in a speech spectrum exhibit het-
erogeneous properties. To this, feature extraction across time
and frequency bins has been implemented separately.
Although time and frequency features are processed sepa-
rately, both are often processed with modules of the same ar-
chitecture [14, 18, 20]. To better reflect the distinction between
time and frequency features, the design should be tailored to ad-
dress a specific domain. In particular, frequency feature extrac-
tion modules need to capture global, local, and periodic patterns
of the speech spectrum effectively. Conformer [14] and Spatial-
Net [21]-style frequency feature extraction have been popular
choices for extracting global and local features by jointly us-
ing full-band (global) modules and sub-band (local) modules.
However, this frequency feature mixing may not be optimal for
GSR due to the lack of local-global selectivity and the spec-
tral periodicity modeling capacity. First, the serially connected
local and global modules reduce selectivity: the model’s abil-
ity to prioritize either local or global frequency representations
depending on the degradation characteristics. This selectivity
between local and global representations is critical, as degraded
speech in GSR exhibits distinct characteristics across different
degradation kernels. For example, the global branch should
be prioritized for bandwidth extension, where the distortion is
caused by the truncation of a wide spectral region. Moreover,
the periodicity in frequency has also been underexplored, de-
spite the importance of near-harmonic structures from vocal ex-
citations. In this regard, a means to focus on global, local, and
periodic feature modeling is required.
Aside from the frequency feature extraction methods, the
5166
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-665
single-resolution TFDP processing may not be optimal in GSR.
TFDP is often implemented at a single resolution—without
aggressive down- or upsampling—to preserve fine details and
minimize upsampling artifacts [22]. Since this design entails a
high number of TF bins, the models are necessarily equipped
with modules capable of modeling long sequences (or many
bins) [14, 18, 23, 20]. Single-resolution processing faces two
limitations. First, scaling model capacity via deeper or wider ar-
chitectures incurs excessive computational overhead due to the
long sequence length. A recent work [10] resolves this prob-
lem by utilizing progressive block expansion strategies. This
approach enables efficient training of high-capacity TFDP mod-
els, but the training strategy is complex and does not alleviate
the heavy computations during inference, which is critical in
resource-restrained settings. Second, single-resolution process-
ing misses opportunities for multi-scale feature extraction. For
instance, in bandwidth-limited signals, information from low-
frequency bins can be better propagated to high-frequency bins
when downsampling is applied along the frequency axis. A re-
cent study [24] uses multi-resolution sequential TFDP process-
ing to resolve this issue, though the sequential TFDP processing
does not fully exploit the diverse speech spectral patterns since
TFDP-processed output from #1 affects TFDP processing at #2
and #3 in Figure 1.
Input Output
Input Output
Input Output
TFDP #1
TFDP
TFDP #2 TFDP #3
ds ds us us
TFDP #1
TFDP #2
TFDP #3
ds
ds us
us
(a) Single-resolution (SR)
(c) Multi-resolution (MR) parallel
(b) Multi-resolution (MR) sequential
Figure 1:Various TFDP processing methods. ds and us denote
downsampling and upsampling, respectively.
To resolve the aforementioned issues, we first propose Fre-
quency GLP (Global, Local, and Periodic), a novel frequency-
processing block that employs a parallel connection of the
global periodicity (GP) module and the local (L) module. The
GP module comprises a series of Fourier Analysis Network
(FAN) [25] applied directly to the frequency bins, whereas the L
module comprises a series of convolutional blocks. The method
effectively leverages the intrinsic properties of the speech spec-
trum, achieving the best performance over a range of advanced
baselines. Note that FAN has been applied in GSR [10] to re-
place the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), but the direct appli-
cation on frequency bins to capture the periodicity in spectral
patterns has been underexplored.
Second, motivated by multi-resolution parallel processing
in the image domain [26], we design a multi-resolution paral-
lel TFDP processing with frequency-only downsampling. Our
architecture operates on three frequency resolutions while pre-
serving the temporal resolution. By downsampling only along
the frequency axis, the architecture enables efficient perfor-
mance elevation without sacrificing temporal fidelity. To fur-
ther capture diverse spectral patterns in degraded speech, we
conduct parallel TFDP processing for each resolution. As illus-
trated in Figure 1, this strategy allows each resolution to special-
ize in distinct spectral patterns, since TFDP-processed results
from #1 do not affect TFDP processing at #2 or #3. Related to
our work, DCCRN [27] explored the U-Net architecture with
frequency-only downsampling, but its feature processing is pri-
marily focused on the most compressed resolution, and empiri-
cal comparisons across different downsampling strategies have
been underexplored. Overall, our contribution can be summa-
rized as follows:
• We propose Frequency GLP, a novel frequency processing
module that effectively and efficiently captures global, local,
and periodic frequency patterns. This improves restoration
quality in both in-domain and out-of-domain scenarios.
• We design multi-resolution parallel TFDP processing with
frequency-only downsampling. We demonstrate that paral-
lel processing allows the model to capture diverse patterns in
the speech spectrum.
• We propose a learnable softplus-based mapping that as-
signs frequency-wise hyperparameters to leverage the dis-
tinct properties of frequency bins.
2. Preliminary
2.1. Fourier Analysis Network
Recently, FAN [25] has emerged as a promising alternative to
the MLP in modern deep learning models. FAN utilizes Fourier
analysis to promote the periodicity in data. Given the inputx∈
Rdx, FAN is defined as follows:
ϕ(x)≜

cos(xWp)∥sin(xWp)∥σ(B¯p+xW ¯p)

,(1)
whereϕ(x),σ(·), and

·∥·

refer to the FAN operation, stan-
dard activation (e.g., Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU)), and
concatenation, respectively.W p ∈R dx×dp,W ¯p∈R dx×d ¯p,
B¯p∈R d ¯p, and FAN operation outputsϕ(x)∈R 2dp+d ¯p. The
FAN layer balances periodicity and general-feature modeling
through the feature sizesd p andd ¯p. In addition, it is necessary
to apply at least one linear layer after FAN so that the Fourier
coefficients can be learned explicitly. Since its sine and co-
sine activations share the same parametersW p, FAN can have
a smaller parameter size than that of a vanilla linear layer with
the same output dimension.
3. Methodology
The proposed model, illustrated in Figure 2(a), has an encoder-
bottleneck-decoder architecture. Its encoder and decoder design
is inherited from [28]. In short, the degraded speech is con-
verted into the magnitude and phase spectrum using the Short-
Time Fourier Transform (STFT), followed by power-law com-
pression [28] of the magnitude spectrum. The spectrums are
then fed to the dilated DenseNet [16]-based encoder, which ex-
pands the channel dimension toCand halves the number of
frequency bins toF ′ =F/2, whereCandFdenote the num-
ber of channels and frequency bins, respectively. We haveN
bottleneck blocks to perform TFDP processing, where we set
Nto 4 andCto 48. After the bottleneck blocks, the features
are passed through two dilated DenseNet-based decoders to es-
timate the magnitude and phase components of clean speech
in parallel. Particularly, the number of frequency bins is dou-
bled toF= 2F ′ in the decoder. The magnitude is power-
law-decompressed, followed by the inverse STFT to generate a
clean waveform. All source codes and demos are available1.
3.1. Frequency GLP
Frequency GLP, shown in Figure 2(b), is the core module intro-
duced for frequency feature extraction. We explain Frequency
1https://sites.google.com/view/semambapp
5167
Figure 2:Overall architecture of SEMamba++ (a) and Frequency GLP (b). In (a), ”Mag. ”, ”Comp. ”, and ”Decomp. ” refer to mag-
nitude, compression, and decompression, respectively. ”Conv” and ”TrConv” indicate the 2d convolution and transposed convolution
that down- and upsample along the frequency axis. (b) describes Frequency GLP with frequency dimensionF′.
GLP by describing its two key aspects. First, the model com-
prises a parallel connection of the GP module and the L module,
each addressing the full frequency band and subbands, respec-
tively. After each module aggregates spectral features, the con-
catenation followed by a pointwise convolution serves as a se-
lection operator to adjust the information flow from both mod-
ules and restore a speech fragment with a given degradation.
The features are fed into a channel feedforward network (FFN)
module to enhance the expressivity of frequency processing.
The second main component of Frequency GLP is the FAN-
based GP module. In the GP module, FAN is applied directly to
the frequency axis rather than to the channel axis. Specifically,
the linear layer is directly applied to frequency bins of dimen-
sionF eff, after which the sine and cosine activations follow.
Feff refers to the effective number of frequency bins in each
resolution illustrated in Figure 2(a). This enables the module to
learn periodicity in the frequency bins, such as harmonics, via
a Fourier series approximation. The GP module first employs a
FAN layer to expand the feature dimension fromF eff to2F eff,
followed by another FAN layer that maintains the dimension at
2Feff. Finally, a linear layer-based gating is applied to learn the
Fourier coefficients. The L module, consisting of a series of
1D convolutions with a kernel size of 3 and GELU activation,
operates along the frequency axis to capture local relationships
within subbands. The local module is beneficial in capturing
spectral relationships that cannot be captured by the FAN-based
GP module. Next, the architecture of the channel FFN module
is the same as that used in the GP module, but with a transposed
input so that the channel dimensionCserves as the input to the
linear layer. This design homogeneity is not only for simplify-
ing the model architecture but also due to the finding [25] that
applying FAN to latent features also helps capture periodicity.
We setdp toC/4for both the GP module and the Channel FFN
module throughout our experiments.
3.2. Multi-resolution parallel TFDP block
We design a multi-resolution parallel TFDP block. Unlike
single-resolution TFDP or multi-resolution sequential TFDP in
Figure 1, we stack multiple TFDP modules within a single block
in parallel to process features of multiple resolutions, as illus-
trated in Figure 2(a). We downsample frequency bins by the
factor of2 r wherer= 1,2,...,R−1for each resolution,
andRdenotes the number of resolutions in a multi-resolution
parallel TFDP block. Parallel processing allows each branch
to process the same signal at a different scale independently,
so they learn complementary features. The frequency down-
sampling and upsampling are done by strided convolutions and
transposed convolutions with a kernel size of (3, 4) and a stride
of (1, 2), respectively, where the dimensions are ordered as
(T,F), followed by instance normalization [29] and parametric
ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) [30].Tdenotes the number of
time bins. Note that the downsampling and upsampling oper-
ations retain the same hidden dimensionC. TFDP processing
comprises Time Mamba [18] and Frequency GLP, with the ex-
pansion factor set to 2 in Time Mamba. After the TFDP pro-
cessing, the bottom resolution (with frequency dimension equal
toF ′/4) is first merged with the middle resolution through
channel-wise concatenation and a pointwise convolution. The
resulting features are then fused with the top resolution outputs
in the same manner. While drawing architectural inspiration
from MIRNet [31], our work departs from it by conducting an
analytical study in Section 5.3 on the complementary feature
extraction capacity of the parallel TFDP processing, which was
underexplored in the original framework. Furthermore, when
combined with Frequency GLP, the proposed frequency-only
downsampling exhibits significant efficiency, as it reduces the
computational complexity of the FAN operation quadratically
with respect to the effective dimensionF eff.
3.3. Learnable softplus mapping
Unlike conventional masking-based magnitude decoders, we
employ a mapping-based magnitude decoder. Even though
masking methods have demonstrated strong performance in de-
noising [18, 28], they show inconsistent performance in band-
width extension, where bandlimited signals have zero energy
in the upper frequency components. Inspired by the learnable
masking in MetricGAN+ [32], we design a learnable softplus
as a mapping function. To capture frequency band-specific pat-
terns, the model learns a distinct parameterβ f for each fre-
quency bandf∈ {1,2,...,F}. The learnable softplus, for
the inputxand the activation outputy, is defined as
y=
1
βf
log

1 +eβfx

,(2)
3.4. Vocoder-style training objective
While MetricGAN methods [18, 28] effectively optimize the
Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ) [33], training
with PESQ as the only adversarial objective may bias the model
toward focusing only on enhancing PESQ instead of capturing
the full aspects of perceptual quality [34]. To address this, we
adopt Least Squares GAN (LSGAN) [35], a widely validated
5168
adversarial loss in neural vocoding [36] and bandwidth exten-
sion [37]. LSGAN does not approximate an explicit objective
quality score (e.g., PESQ) and lets the generator learn a more
generalized notion of perceptual quality, which is empirically
validated in Table 8. Moreover, recent work demonstrates that
LSGAN can encourage deterministic, clean waveform predic-
tion from degraded inputs [38]. We use Multi-Scale Sub-Band
Constant Q Transform Discriminator (MS-SB-CQTD) [39] and
Multi-Resolution Discriminator (MRD) [40] as our discrimi-
nators. For MS-SB-CQTD, we used three sub-discriminators,
setting the number of octaves to 8 and the number of bins per
octave to 12, 24, and 36, respectively. The remaining settings
for MS-SB-CQTD and MRD follow the approach in [36]. The
adversarial training objective is formulated as
Ladv(G;D) =E x

(D(G(x))−1) 2
(3)
Ladv(D;G) =E y

(D(y)−1) 2
+Ex

D(G(x))2
,(4)
whereyandxrepresent the clean and degraded waveforms,
respectively.DandGrepresent the discriminator and the
generator, respectively. To stabilize the training, we employ
several reconstruction losses. We use spectrogram magnitude
L1 lossL mag, anti-wrapping phase loss [41]L awp, consis-
tency loss [42]L con, complex loss [14]L RI, multi-scale mel
spectrogram loss [43]L mel, and feature matching loss [44]
LFM. Forλ mag,λ awp,λ con, andλ RI, we followed the hy-
perparameters introduced in the previous work [18]. We set
λmel = 0.1andλ FM = 1.0. Our discriminator training objec-
tive isLD =L adv(D;G), and the generator training objective
is formulated as below:
LG =λ advLadv(G;D) +λ magLmag +λ awpLawp+(5)
λconLcon +λ RILRI +λ melLmel +λ FMLFM (6)
4. Experimental settings
4.1. Training
DatasetsWe utilized VCTK (version 0.92) [45] for speech data,
except for speakers in p280 and p315 due to technical issues.
For noise data, we used WHAM! [46] and DNS Challenge
2020 [47]. WHAM! consists of various recordings from urban
locations, whereas the DNS challenge 2020 noise dataset com-
prises sound clips from YouTube videos. To simulate reverber-
ation, we used Arni [48] and the DNS5 challenge [49]. Data
were sampled at 16 kHz and split into VCTK-GSRtrainand
VCTK-GSRtest, following [50]. Note that the noise and room
impulse response sources were also split into train-test subsets.
Degradation simulationWe considered noise, reverberation,
bandwidth limitation, and clipping for distortion simulation. In
training, we randomly applied various distortions. The signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) ranged from -10 to 20 dB, covering ex-
tremely noisy to clean conditions. Bandwidth reduction is ap-
plied at multiple cutoff frequencies (2–7 kHz) using various
filter types (e.g., Chebyshev Type 1, Butterworth) and orders
(2–8) to achieve diverse spectral effects.
Training configurationsThe segment size of 24,000 samples
(1.5 seconds) was used for training. For STFT, we used a Hann
window with a window length of 400 samples and a hop size of
100 samples. For the proposed method and variants in ablation
studies, we set the learning rate as 2e-4 and the AdamW [51]
optimizer withβ 1 andβ 2 set to 0.8 and 0.99, respectively. The
batch size was 8, and training was done for 100 epochs. An
exponential learning rate decay withγ= 0.99was used.
4.2. Evaluation
DatasetsFor in-domain performance evaluation, we used the
VCTK-GSRtestdataset. Separately, to check generalization
capacity to unseen data domains and degradations, we utilized
the official validation set and blind test set in URGENT Chal-
lenge 2025 [12], the DNS 2020 test set [47], and the test set
of CCF-AATC Challenge 2025 [13]. The URGENT validation
dataset (URGENT 2025val) employs a wider range of degra-
dation types and languages.2 The URGENT blind test set (UR-
GENT 2025test) comprises real-world GSR data. The DNS
2020 test set (DNS 2020test) is a real-world dataset with noise
and reverberation. Lastly, the CCF-AATC test set encompasses
the widest range of degradation types, including secondary arti-
facts from imperfect neural network-based enhancements.
Baseline methodsWe have selected various baseline meth-
ods to comprehensively show the effectiveness of our proposed
method. We used two MetricGAN-based effective SE networks,
MP-SENet [28] and SEMamba [18]. Although their initial task
was denoising, results on recent challenges [13] also showed
surprising performance in GSR settings. For LM-based ap-
proaches, we used LLaSE-G1 [9] and MaskSR [8]. For non-
LM generative methods, we used Universe++ [4]and ANYEN-
HANCE [6]. Lastly, we employed V oiceFixer [1] and USE-
Mamba [11]. V oiceFixer [1] is the first unified framework for
high-fidelity speech restoration that uses a two-stage approach
to restore degraded speech from multiple distortions. USE-
Mamba [11] extended SEMamba to GSR via a hybrid flow-
matching [52] and regressive modeling approach. In our case,
we utilized the version without Flow matching, which achieved
the best performance in non-blind phase results among other
variants [18].The loss is purely regressive towards minimizing
sample point-wise distance without requiring a GAN or any
generative method. For all the baseline methods, we followed
the official training codes. For LLaSE-G1, we used noise sup-
pression mode, which may have degraded GSR performance
since it only supports denoising and dereverberation. For USE-
Mamba, because the code was unavailable, we implemented the
model as described in the original paper.
Evaluation MetricsWe considered a range of neural and sig-
nal processing-based speech quality metrics. For neural speech
quality prediction, we utilized SCOREQ [53], UTMOS [54],
and DNSMOS [55] to assess the overall perceptual quality and
naturalness. For SCOREQ, we used the version trained on
synthetic data quality prediction in no-reference mode to bet-
ter