A Corpus-Based Study of Creaky Voice Production in English and Mandarin 
Meixian Li1, Yao Yao1, Charles Chang2 
1 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
2 City University of Hong Kong 
meixian.li@connect.polyu.hk, y.yao@polyu.edu.hk, cbchang@cityu.edu.hk 
    
Abstract 
Creaky voice has been extensively examined across varieties of 
English, but cross -linguistic sociophonetic research on it 
remains limited. This study presents an acoustic investigation 
of creaky voice production in Mandarin Chinese and US 
English, using read -speech cor pora comprising 66 Mandarin 
speakers (34F) and 61 English speakers (28F). Audios were 
processed via a pipeline of segmentation, annotation, cleaning, 
and acoustic analysis. 5,874 vowel tokens were measured for 
F0, H1 –H2c, HNR35, and CPP over the 70% mid -portion. 
Linear mixed-effects analyses revealed men produced creakier 
speech than women in both languages. Findings contradict the 
notion that creaky voice is predominantly a feature of young 
women’s speech in US English but align with findings of more 
creakiness in men’s speech. We discuss the Mandarin results in 
relation to recent work on Mandarin listeners’ social perception 
of creaky voice. 
Index Terms : creaky voice, corpus, Mandarin, English, 
gender, acoustic analysis 
1. Introduction 
1.1. Creaky voice and gender-specific social meanings 
Creaky voice, characterized by low fundamental frequency 
(F0), irregular vocal fold vibration, and reduced transglottal 
airflow [1], has been extensively examined in sociophonetic 
research, particularly within English varieties. Acoustically, 
creaky voice is commonly identified by a flatter spectral tilt as 
in depressed H1–H2 values [2], decreased signal-to-noise ratios 
such as harmonics -to-noise ratios (HNR) [3 -5], lowered 
cepstral peak prominence (CPP) [2, 6 -7], and lower and less 
reliable F0 [3], all of which reflect increased glottal constriction 
and aperiodicity. These acoustic measures form the basis for 
much of the empirical work on creaky phonation. 
Beyond its phonetic definition, creaky voice has been 
shown to carry rich socio -indexical meanings, contributing to 
listeners’ judgments about a speaker’s affect and mood, 
personality traits, and social status [8]. Most previous research 
along this line fo cused on English, especially American 
English, with gender being one of the most researched factors 
in the perception and production of creaky voice. A substantial 
body of research (e.g., [9 -11]) reports negative evaluations of 
creaky voice in the speech o f young women, with creakiness 
associated with incompetence, disinterest, or unprofessionalism 
when adopted by female talkers (however, see [12 -13] for 
evidence of less negative or even positive perception of creaky 
voice). In fact, many people consider creaky phonation a rising 
speech style that is largely negatively perceived and primarily 
attributed to females [14].  
Despite the female bias observed in perceptual findings, 
production studies report mixed results in relation to the relative 
frequency of creaky phonation by female vs. male talkers (see 
[9] for a review). For example, a recent corpus study of 
Canadian Eng lish–French bilinguals [15] showed that men 
produce more creakiness (with lower values of H1 –H2, CPP, 
and HNR) than women in both languages, contradicting the 
widespread notion that young women lead in the production of 
this feature. 
1.2. Crosslinguistic investigation of creaky voice 
Outside English, the study of creaky voice, or “creak”, remains 
comparatively limited. While creaky phonation is attested 
across many languages, much of the existing work on creak 
focuses on its phonological or prosodic functions rather than its 
socio-indexical properties. For example, it has been shown that 
in tonal languages such as Mandarin Chinese and Cantonese, 
creak frequently marks low -pitch targets, enhances tonal 
contrasts, and signals tone sandhi processes [16-17], whereas in 
non-tonal languages, creak often aligns with prosodic 
boundaries. 
Among existing studies examining creaky voice outside of 
English, gender differences in creak production and perception 
are also debatable. As mentioned above, the findings of [15] for 
Canadian French contrast with previous results on English. If 
we take M andarin as an example, some studies reported 
minimal or no gender differences in both the perception and 
production of creaky voice [17 -18], whereas a more recent 
study [19] found gendered patterns in the perception of creaky 
voice, with more negative eval uations for male talkers’  
creak production  than for female talkers’, suggesting major 
differences from the perceptual results on English.  
These findings suggest that the use of creaky voice and its 
associated social meanings likely  vary across languages and 
cultures. More crosslinguistic research is therefore needed to 
establish the relationship between gender and 
perception/production of creaky voice in different languages. 
Importantly, crosslinguistic comparison would benefit from the 
use of shared methods, so that any variations observed in the 
results between different languages cannot be attributed to 
methodological discrepancies.   
1.3. Current study 
The goal of this study was to examine creak production in two 
typologically distinct languages, US English and Mandarin 
Chinese spoken in Mainland China. Both languages have 
appeared in previous studies of creaky voice, with mixed 
results. In this study, w e created two parallel speech corpora 
with sentence recordings from native speakers of English and 
Mandarin, each reading in their respective native language.  
1779
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3235
Our central research question concerned how talker gender 
and language would affect creak production in relatively careful 
speech. To address these questions, we analyzed four acoustic 
correlates of creaky phonation (F0, H1 –H2, HNR, CPP) in the 
recordings and assessed the effect of gender on these correlates 
across languages. 
2. Methods 
2.1. Corpus construction 
The corpora consist of read-speech recordings produced by 66 
native Mandarin Chinese speakers (34F, 32M ; age 28–40) and 
61 native US English speakers (2 8F, 33M; age 20–40). Three 
other English speakers (1F, 2M) finished the reading task but 
were not included in the corpus: one male due to a non -US 
accent, and one male and one female due to the absence of 
identifiable speech in their recordings. The Mandarin speakers 
were born and raised in Mainland China and completed at least 
primary and secondary education in Mandarin. Consistent with 
the general linguistic profile of this demographic group, all 
Mandarin participants reported speaking English a s a second 
language (L2), and many reported knowledge of additional non-
Mandarin varieties of Chinese as home dialects or heritage 
languages. All the US English participants, on the other hand, 
self-reported as monolinguals with no additional languages. 
Both groups were relatively young and roughly balanced in 
gender.  
All the recordings were made on the  Gorilla platform at a 
sampling frequency of 48 kHz. Mandarin participants attended 
the experiment in person in a sound -treated room  in Hong 
Kong, while the English participants participated remotely from 
various US locations due to practical constraints. To ensure the 
recording quality of remote participants, we implemented pre -
study device checks, which blocked participants without 
required devices, and post -study quality screening, which 
filtered out recordings with sub-par audio quality and/or audible 
background noise.  
Table 1. Sentences for recording. 
 
Each participant read five sentences in their native language 
conveying emotion -neutral content (see Table 1 for the full 
sentence list). Across the two languages, the sentence sets were 
carefully controlled so that the two groups produced materials 
with comparable length, similar syntactic structures, and a 
balanced distribution of consonants and vowels (and tones, for 
Mandarin). Thus, for both languages, the sentences were 10–15 
syllables in length (M = 11.7), limited to one matrix clause with 
a nominal subject, and contained a variety of phones/tones. All 
participants were instructed to read the sentences as naturally 
and clearly as possible in a self -paced experiment with no 
interlocutor present (either in person or on screen) . Sentence 
recordings with serious speech errors or audio issues impacting 
intelligibility were excluded from analysis; this resulted in the 
exclusion of 0.3% of the Mandarin sentence tokens and 2.6% 
of the English sentence tokens. 
2.2. Data preprocessing and acoustic measurement 
Raw recordings were first converted to 16 -bit mono -channel 
WAV files at a sampling rate of 16 kHz and then scaled to 70 
dB in average intensity. Forced alignment with the Montreal 
Forced Aligner [20] was then applied, using language -specific 
acoustic model s and pronunciation dictionaries ( Mandarin: 
Mandarin (China) MFA dictionary v3.0.0; English: English 
(US) MFA dictionary v3.1.0). The resulting annotations at word 
and phoneme levels were manually inspected and adjusted by 
the authors as needed. With phoneme -level annotations, we 
identified all intervals of vowels in each language comprising 
low, mid, and high vowels (Mandarin: [a], [i], [y], [u], [ej], [ə], 
[e], [o]; English: [æ], [a], [ɑ], [i], [ɪ], [u], [ej], [ə], [ɛ]; N > 3,600 
in each language).  
Given the relationship of creak with F0, F0 was central to 
our acoustic analyses and was the primary basis for excluding a 
subset of vowel tokens. F0 was automatically tracked in Praat 
[21] in 1-ms steps, with the possible F0 range set to 70–450 Hz 
for female talkers and  50–300 Hz for male talkers. We then 
excluded tokens with (1) extremely short (< 50 ms) or long (> 
500 ms) durations (Mandarin: N = 258; English: N = 315), 
which possibly reflected disfluencies or speech errors , or (2) 
untrackable F0 in the 70% mid -portion (Mandarin: N = 430; 
English: N = 615). The final dataset contain ed 3,002 vowel 
tokens in Mandarin and 2,872 in English. The proportion of 
tokens with untrackable F0 was similar across languages 
(English: 13%; Mandarin: 17%) and also genders. In English, 
the male-female breakdown of excluded tokens was 52% vs. 
48%; in Mandarin, it was 50.5% vs. 49.5%. 
Apart from F0, three additional acoustic measures were 
obtained for the 70% mid -portion of each vowel token with 
VoiceSauce [22]: the corrected amplitude difference between 
the first and second harmonics of the voice spectrum (H1–H2c), 
the harmonics-to-noise ratio in the 0–3500 Hz range (HNR35), 
and the cepstral peak prominence (CPP).  Because potentially 
unreliable measurements arising from severe F0 tracking 
failures were already excluded through the F0 -based screening 
procedure described above, n o additional acoustically -based 
outlier removal was performed beyond the above token -level 
exclusions. 
2.3. Data analysis 
To investigate the effects of language and gender on creaky 
phonation, we fitted separate linear mixed-effects models on the 
four acoustic measures (F0, H1 –H2c, HNR35, CPP) using the 
lme4 package [23] in R [2 4]. For each model, the dependent 
variable comprised the by -token mean values of the acoustic 
measure over the central 70% of each vowel token. In all 
Language Sentence 
Mandarin 
sentences 
(with 
English 
glosses) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
English 
sentences 
 
 
小李去商店买了很多东西  
   (“Xiaoli bought many things from the store.”) 
老师让我们明天交论文草稿  
   (“The teacher asked us to submit the paper draft 
tomorrow.”) 
丽丽经常去咖啡店写作业  
   (“Lili often goes to a café to do her homework.”) 
小明特别喜欢在阳台前读书  
   (“Xiaoming especially likes reading on the 
balcony.”) 
珍珍可没说她一定会来  
   (“Zhenzhen didn’t say she would come.”) 
 
The man left his keys on the kitchen table.  
She likes to read before going to bed. 
My parents moved into a new apartment last week. 
I plan to study biology at the university. 
The weather is getting warmer every day. 
1780
models, the critical fixed effects were Language, Gender, and 
their interaction. Following [15], we also included 
VowelHeight, a categorical variable that distinguishes low 
vowels (Mandarin: [a]; English: [a], [ɑ], [æ]) and high/mid (i.e., 
non-low) vowels (Mandarin: [i], [y], [u], [ej], [ə], [e], [o];  
English: [i], [ɪ], [u], [ej], [ə], [ɛ]), as a fixed effect to control for 
potential acoustic differences between low vowels and 
high/mid vowels. Random intercepts for Talker and Word were 
included in all the models, with additional random slopes 
(VowelHeight by Talker, Gender by Word) where applicable 
[25-26]. All the categorical predictors were coded with sum 
contrasts, with the levels ordered as follows: Language: 
English, Mandarin; Gender: Female, Male; Vowel Height: 
Nonlow, Low. Significant Language ×  Gender interactions 
were followed up with post -hoc pairwise comparisons using 
estimated marginal means (implemented by the emmeans 
package [27]) with the Bonferroni correction.  
3. Results 
3.1. Effects of language and talker gender on F0 
The results for F0 were consistent with the predicted gender 
difference in F0, but no significant cross-language variations in 
F0 were found  (see Figure 1). The m ixed-effects model of F0 
revealed only a significant effect of Gender ( β = 38.65, SE = 
2.13, p < .001), with female talkers producing higher F0 than 
male talkers. There was no effect of Language or VowelHeight, 
nor was there a Language ×  Gender interaction (all ps > .1).  
 
Figure 1: Estimated F0 values by language group and talker 
gender. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. 
Significance code: *** p < .001.   
3.2. Effects of language and talker gender on H1–H2c 
Figure 2 shows gender differences in H1 –H2c across English 
and Mandarin. The model of H1 –H2c revealed a significant 
effect of Gender (β = 2.09, SE = 0.38, p < .001), showing that 
female talkers exhibited significantly higher H1–H2c values 
than male talkers. There was also a significant effect of 
Language (β = -1.40, SE = 0.43, p = .001), reflecting English 
talkers’ lower H1–H2c values as compared to Mandarin talkers. 
The Language ×  Gender interaction was not significant (β = -
0.40, SE = 0.36, p = .27), consistent with the visually similar 
gender difference across languages. The effect of VowelHeight 
was not significant, either ( β = 0.09, SE = 0.16, p = .58). 
Overall, the H1 –H2c model suggested that, by virtue of their 
lower H1–H2c values, male talkers tended to be creakier than 
female talkers, in both Mandarin and English.   
 
Figure 2: Estimated H1 -H2c values by language group and 
talker gender.  Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. 
Significance codes: ** p < .01, *** p < .001.  
3.3. Effects of language and talker gender on HNR35 
Figure 3 shows estimated HNR35 values by language and 
gender. While the HNR35 model showed no significant effect 
of Language ( β = 0.97, SE = 0.76, p = .21 ), it revealed a 
significant effect of Gender ( β = 2.77, SE = 0.37, p < .001), 
indicating higher values for female talkers than male talkers. 
Furthermore, the Language ×  Gender interaction was 
significant ( β = -0.95, SE = 0.37, p = .012). Post -hoc 
comparisons showed that the effect of Gender was significant 
for both languages but larger in Mandarin (est. [female – male] 
= 7.26, p < .001) than in English (est. = 3.61, p < .0001). While 
female talkers were not significantly different across languages 
(p = .49 ), Mandarin male talkers had significantly lower 
HNR35 than English male talkers (p = .004 ). Additionally, 
there was a significant effect of  VowelHeight (β = 0.91, SE = 
0.22, p < .001), with high/mid vowels showing higher HNR35 
values than low vowels.  
In summary, the HNR35 results showed a pattern of male 
talkers producing creakier speech (as suggested by lower 
HNR35 values) than female talkers in both languages. The 
gender gap was larger for Mandarin than English, mainly due 
to the especially low values of Mandarin male talkers.  
 
Figure 3: Estimated HNR35 values by language group and 
talker gender.  Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. 
Significance code: *** p < .001.  
3.4. Effects of language and talker gender on CPP 
Figure 4 shows estimated CPP values for female and male 
talkers in English and Mandarin. The model of CPP did not 
reveal any significant effects of Gender or Language, nor a 
1781
Language ×  Gender interaction (all ps > .1). Only the effect of 
VowelHeight was significant (β = -0.37, SE = 0.14, p = .008): 
high/mid vowels showed lower CPP values than low vowels. 
 
Figure 4: Estimated CPP values by language group and talker 
gender. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. 
4. Discussion 
Our results demonstrate a consistent gendered pattern for 
Mandarin and English: men are creakier than women . The 
most important acoustic evidence for this pattern came from the 
results for H1–H2c and HNR35. Results for F0 were also in line 
with this pattern; however, since gender differences in F0 are 
more majorly influenced by physiology, we do not consider the 
F0 results as the main evidence for the gender effect on 
creakiness. Only the CPP results did not show any significant 
effect of gender; this may be because CPP primarily reflects the 
overall periodic organization of speech in the cepstral domain 
and is therefore less sensitive to glottal irregularities that are 
characteristic of creaky voice. 
The observation of men being creakier than women in US 
English is consistent with recent corpus findings on Canadian 
English [15], but it contrasts with the preexisting notion —
largely derived from social perception studies on US English—
that creakiness is predominantly a feature of young women’s 
speech. Our results provide further evidence of a dissociation 
between the perceived gendered use of creaky voice and its 
actual production patterns. The dissociation may reflect the 
complex nature of social perception, in which social meanings 
may be constructed at least partly independently of production 
patterns. Alternatively, it may signal an ongoing change in 
speech production, with younger men catching up with —or 
even exceeding—younger women in their adoption of creaky 
voice. In fact, these potential explanations are not mutually 
exclusive. 
Crucially, t he pattern of men being creakier than women 
exists for Mandarin as well, and to an even larger extent. A 
significant Language ×  Gender interaction was observed for 
HNR35, indicating larger gender differentiation in Mandarin 
than in English. These findings contrast with previous reports 
of no gender difference in creak use by Mandarin speakers [18]. 
The discrepancy between our findings and previous findings 
may be due to  differences in  speech materials, acoustic 
measures, analytic proce dures, and/or population focus. 
Notably, in [18], creak was quantified in terms of  the overall 
creak rate (calculated over tokens), whereas this study 
examined four individual acoustic correlates  of phonation at 
the token level. Moreover, while the analysis in [18] was based 
on talker-level summaries with the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, the 
current study employed mixed-effects modeling to account for 
talker- and word-level variability. In addition, the Mandarin 
speakers in [18] were from Taiwan, whereas those in the current 
study were recruited from Mainland China. It is thus possible 
that the discrepancy between our results and those in [18] reflect 
methodological differences and/or var iation in gendered 
patterns of creak production across different varieties of 
Mandarin.  
That said , our results o n Mandarin creak are compatible 
with previous perceptual work showing negative perception of 
creaky male voices by Mandarin listeners, particularly male 
listeners [19]. The coexistence of robust acoustic correlates of 
creakiness in male talkers and negative evaluations of such 
voices suggests an emerging creaky speech style among 
Mandarin men that is, unfortunately, subject to unfavorable 
social evaluations. Creak in Mandarin may help construct an 
affected, mature -sounding, masculine persona, which is 
particularly unwelcome by heterosexual male listeners.  
Taken together, the current crosslinguistic corpus findings  
suggest that there are indeed gendered production disparities in 
creakiness across languages. These gender effects on creak 
production may encourage  creaky voice to carry gendered 
socio-indexical meanings in a variety of languages; however, as 
we observed here in the difference in effect size between 
Mandarin and English, we expect that future research will 
reveal substantial crosslinguistic variation in the manifesta tion 
of gender effects, as well as social perception patterns that do 
not necessarily align with gendered production disparities (cf. 
[10] vs. [15]). By contributing suggestive evidence of 
variability in gender effects across languages, these results 
attest to the importance of linguistic and cultural diversity in 
sociophonetic research and can serve as a basis for future 
crosslinguistic work exploring variation in creak production. 
In closing, we would like to point out some limitations of 
the current findings, which highlight several avenues for further 
research. First, there was variation in recording devices in the 
English group only. Because recording equipment is known to 
influence acoustic data [28 -29], we are cautious about 
overinterpreting within-gender language differences, and have 
kept our focus on gender effects within each language. Second, 
our analysis excluded tokens with untrackable F0, which were 
disproportionately cr eaky. Our findings may therefore 
underestimate the overall extent of creak production in the 
current speaker sample. Finally, our results are based on read 
speech, which may not reflect patterns of creak production in 
more spontaneous speech styles where s ocial meaning is more 
directly negotiated. Future research could address these 
limitations by more strictly controlling recording devices across 
languages, adopting an analytic approach that accounts for 
untrackable F0 proportions (allowing otherwise exclu ded 
tokens to be retained and analyzed), and using naturalistic 
speech production tasks.   
Another direction for future work on cross -language 
differences is to focus on bilingual speakers, such as Mandarin-
English bilinguals. A bilingual speech corpus can provide a 
complementary perspective on whether gendered patterns of 
creaky phonation in a given language are truly specific to that 
language. If, for example, a bilingual’s creak patterns were to 
shift systematically across their languages, this would provide 
further evidence that voice quality is shaped by language -
specific phonological structures and sociophonetic norms. 
Bilingual speech will thus shed unique light on the extent to 
which cross -language variation in creaky voice reflects 
linguistic conditioning versus broader speaker-level tendencies. 
1782
5. Generative AI Use Disclosure 
The authors used ChatGPT (OpenAI) only for language editing 
and proofreading. All scientific content, analyses, 
interpretations, and conclusions were developed and verified by 
the authors, who take full responsibility for the manuscript.