Making Room for Speech Diversity: A 50 Year Retrospective of Speech Science
and Technology through a Neurodivergent Lens
Rebecca Lietz ID 1, Jingjin Li ID 2, Peiyao Liu ID 1, Jennifer Chien ID 3, Norman Makoto Su ID 1,
Shaomei Wu ID 2
1 Computational Media, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA
2 AImpower.org, USA
3 Stanford University, USA
rlietz@ucsc.edu, jingjin@aimpower.org, pliu62@ucsc.edu, drchien@stanford.edu,
normsu@ucsc.edu, shaomei@aimpower.org
Abstract
Interest in diversity and inclusion in speech science and technol-
ogy has grown in recent years, reflected in an increasing number
of Interspeech publications on “atypical” speech from disability
communities. We take this momentum as an opportunity to ex-
amine how diversity has been framed in Interspeech’s research
discourse. Using neurodivergent speech as a case study, we con-
duct a scoping review of relevant Interspeech and ICASSP pa-
pers from 1976 to 2025. Our content and discourse analysis
identifies three recurring issues: (1) medicalized and interven-
tionist framings position neurodivergent traits as deficits to be
corrected; (2) minimal inclusion of neurodivergent individuals
in the research process, distancing stakeholders and limiting im-
pact; and (3) ableist language that contributes to the marginal-
ization in speech technology research. We conclude by propos-
ing pathways through which Interspeech can achieve its stated
goal of celebrating “allvoices” in its research and practice.
Index Terms: neurodivergent speech, disability, ableism, neu-
rodivergence, models of disability, inclusivity, discourse analy-
sis
1. Introduction
Human speech is highly variable. The human brain demon-
strates a remarkable adaptability to create a wide range of
voices, accents, and speaking styles [1]. Speech technologies,
in contrast, cater to a narrow set of “typical” speech patterns,
underperforming for individuals with speech diversities such as
stuttering [2, 3], deaf speech [4], second language speech [5, 6],
as well as regional vernaculars [7]. As speech interfaces are in-
creasingly integrated into everyday communication, including
voice assistants, automated customer service, and assistive tech-
nologies, improving performance across diverse speech popula-
tions has become both a technical and societal priority.
Recognizing this gap, the Interspeech community has
shown an increasing interest in speech diversity research, re-
flected most recently in its 2026 conference theme of “Speaking
Together.” Given the growing number of publications contribut-
ing new models, datasets, and systems aiming to promote this
theme, we believe it is an opportune moment to critically exam-
ine and reflect on the history of Interspeech to identify future
opportunities to better promote inclusivity.
As a step toward this goal, we review existing papers on
accessible and inclusive speech technology through the lens of
neurodiversity. Neurodiversity frames cognitive and commu-
nicative differences as natural variations rather than solely clin-
ical deficits. As an umbrella term encompassing a wide range
of conditions (e.g., autism, dyslexia, ADHD, and stuttering),
neurodiversity is an apt lens to evaluate inclusivity in Inter-
speech for three reasons: (1) it affects a significant portion of
the population – estimated at 15–20% [8] – and has frequently
been the target for inclusion-oriented research efforts; (2) it of-
ten affects speech and communication in a non-degenerative
and non-reversible way; and (3) as a social and political move-
ment, neurodiversity fosters rich discourse and scholarship on
the design and evaluation of assistive and everyday technolo-
gies [9, 10, 11]. Leveraging neurodiversity as a case study,
we critically examine the existing body of work on speech di-
versities in the past 50 years. Our systematic review covers
Interspeech and IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) – two of the largest
speech science and technology conferences – publications from
1976 to 2025 that involve the speech of neurodiverse commu-
nities. Instead of cataloging the technical methods and systems
described in these publications, our review centers on how they
engage with real-world contexts and diverse stakeholders – par-
ticularly people with disabilities (PWD) – by examining their
research motivations, data practices, evaluation processes, and
primary contributions. This approach allows us to identify key
trends, common practices, and opportunities for more mean-
ingful inclusion of impacted populations into the research and
development of speech science and technologies.
Through our analyses, we find that neurodivergent speech
research often takes a pathologizing, deficit-based approach,
aiming to “cure” or “correct” neurodivergent traits in order to
fit the neurotypical norm. Other stakeholders, like clinicians or
PWD, are rarely involved in the research process, normalizing
distance and even disconnection between researchers and the
populations they aim to support. The use of ableist-style lan-
guage and misconceptions about neurodiverse conditions fur-
ther contribute to the othering of PWD. We hope our review in-
spires reparative reflection within the Interspeech community.
We encourage the field to explore new problems grounded in
the experiences of people with speech diversities, foster part-
nerships between researchers and stakeholders, and cultivate an
anti-ableist mindset around the research process and its impact.
2. Background & Related Work
2.1. Models of Disability
Different models of disability have been developed to concep-
tualize disability and shape research priorities. Historically, the
medical model of disabilityhas been the dominant framework
4364
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2962
in research and society, positioning disability as an individual
pathology or deficit in need of diagnosis, treatment, prevention,
or cure [12, 13]. While a useful framework for designing assis-
tive technologies, the medical model of disability has increas-
ingly received criticism from disability scholars and activists for
framing disability as deterministic and biologically inferior, re-
inforcing social stigma around disability-related traits [11, 14].
This model reproduces asymmetric power relations by framing
the individual as deficient and positioning medical and technical
professionals as the authorities that define needs, set goals, and
determine success [15, 16]. PWD are then treated as passive
recipients of care instead of as agents entitled to access and par-
ticipation [12]. This dynamic can elevate professional gatekeep-
ing, amplifying the social consequences of labeling and stigma.
In technology and engineering contexts, the medical model
often manifests through research and design that prioritize di-
agnosis, detection, and symptom reduction. Such framings
treat disability as a technical anomaly requiring correction
rather than as a sociotechnical mismatch that should be ad-
dressed through accessibility, accommodation, and environ-
mental changes [17, 18]. Adopting such medicalized perspec-
tives risks pathologizing ordinary variation in communication
and social interaction. It also shifts attention away from struc-
tural causes (e.g., inaccessible environments, stigma, discrimi-
nation) and toward individual correction [19]. Overall, critiques
of the medical model do not deny the reality of impairment or
the value of clinical care. Rather, they question the assumption
that care should aim to make PWD behave more “normally” and
that professional and clinical institutions should define goals
and standards of success on their behalf [17, 16].
In contrast, thesocial model of disabilityargues that dis-
ability arises from the way society is structured: an individ-
ual is not disabled by their physical condition but by environ-
mental, social, and systemic factors [20]. Developed by PWD,
the social model of disability has been embraced by the dis-
ability community to recognize the value of disability experi-
ences and advocate for societal changes that ensure full inclu-
sion of PWD [11]. This perspective reframes disability as a mat-
ter of civic rights and social justice, highlighting how barriers
in architecture, education, and communication norms restrict
PWD’s participation in society [12]. PWD communities have
leveraged the social model to advocate for more inclusive prac-
tices and designs. Members of the stuttering community, for ex-
ample, have argued that both listener and speaker are involved
in “constructing a disabled speaker” [21], claiming that commu-
nicative breakdown is not produced solely by disfluent speech
patterns, but also by listeners’ expectations of fluency, speed,
and uninterrupted turn-taking. Within the stuttering commu-
nity, more people are embracing stuttering pride [22], refram-
ing their experiences to find value and strength in their stutter-
ing while advocating for recognition and reduced stigma [13].
Overall, the social model of disability places responsibility for
inclusion onto society and institutions rather than individuals
alone [17, 16, 18].
2.2. Neurodiversity Movement
The neurodiversity movement originated in the late 1990s as an
alternative to medicalized views of cognitive and communica-
tive differences [23]. Initial efforts aimed to reframe conditions
such as autism, ADHD, and dyslexia as natural variations in
human cognition rather than pathologies. Today, neurodiversity
has sparked social and political movements for the rights and
liberation of those living with developmental neurological con-
ditions. For example, these efforts now include promoting in-
clusive education and employment, reducing stigma, challeng-
ing deficit-based language, and advocating for structural and en-
vironmental changes that support diverse ways of thinking and
communicating [8, 24]. Neurodiversity advocates emphasize
the unique skills and advantages of different neurological traits
and demand the acceptance, recognition, and the right to live
authentically with these traits [25].
In recent years, the neurodiversity framework has expanded
to include speech diversity such as stuttering [14]. This addition
empowers people who stutter to find meaning and joy in their
stuttering experience while still acknowledging their vulnera-
bility to social and structural exclusion that necessitates accom-
modations from listeners.
2.3. Technoableism and Disfluent Speech
Despite the social model of disability and the neurodiver-
sity movement challenging deficit-based notions of disability,
ableism – the assumption that able-bodied and neurotypical ex-
periences are superior – remains deeply embedded in contempo-
rary society. This is reflected in the tools aimed to help such in-
dividuals. Technoableism is enmeshed in assistive technologies
that are designed to make PWDappearoract“normal” rather
than augment or remove the structural barriers that pathologize
alternative means of expression and living [10]. While these
technologies may benefit some users, they often function as
what activists disparagingly call “disability dongles” – tools de-
veloped without meaningful input from disabled communities
that fail to address their real-world needs [26].
Speech technologies often exemplify technoableism, treat-
ing fluent speech as the default and the ideal design goal. Prod-
ucts specially designed for people with speech disfluency often
focus on eliminating disfluencies, either by altering the behavior
of the speaker or by modifying their speech. SpeechEasy1 aims
to “fix” speakers, training their users to speak more fluently
– with significant effort and financial costs. Google’s Project
Relate2 directly targets “non-standard” speech, providing func-
tionality such as closed-captioning, repeating through a com-
puterized voice, and text-to-voice generation, all of which aim
to make the “speaker” more fluent.
Disfluent communities have increasingly resisted the ableist
desire for fluent speech, challenging the medical necessity of
speech restructuring for merely auditory aesthetics [27]. In-
stead, many advocates promote an affirmative narrative around
speech disfluency, which views stuttering and other speech dif-
ferences not as defects to be eliminated but as natural forms of
human communication [22, 28]. Central to this shift is the dis-
ability justice principle of “nothing about us without us” [29];
disabled people must be meaningfully involved in decisions, re-
search, and technologies that shape their lives. This perspec-
tive has begun to reshape public discourse and technological
development. For example, the stuttering community recently
organized a successful public campaign against an AI-assisted
fluency-first app marketed by Samsung, demanding that the
voices of people who stutter be heard rather than suppressed
by speech technology3.
1https://speecheasy.com
2https://sites.research.google/relate/
3https://www.spacetostutter.org/impulse
4365
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025
(a)Histogram of publications in our corpus
0
300
600
900
1200
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1990 2000 2010 2020
year
Total papers published
% of papers in our corpus
 (3-year rolling avg)
(b)Percentages of Interspeech publications included in our corpus
(shown in the line and points), and histogram of total Interspeech (Eu-
roSpeech and ICSLP before 2004) publications (shown in bars)
Figure 1:Temporal trends of publications in our corpus
0
10
20
30
1976-19801981-19851986-19901991-19951996-20002001-20052006-20102011-20152016-20202021-2025
years
publication count
ADHD
Autism (ASD)
Bipolar
Down Syndrom
Other
Stuttering
Figure 2:Number of publications on different conditions over
time
3. Methods & Data
In an effort to steward future research objectives and inclusive
practices, we set out to answer the following questions:
• How is disability and neurodivergence framed in speech tech-
nology papers?
• How involved are PWD and other stakeholders in the re-
search process?
• Who primarily benefits from the technological innovations
being described?
• How have approaches to disability and neurodivergence in
speech technology research changed over the last 50 years?
We first identified papers about disfluent or atypical speech
published at Interspeech and ICASSP, the top two publica-
tion venues in the Acoustics & Sound space [30]. Using the
word stems ‘stutter,’ ‘disfluen,’ ‘dysfluen,’ ‘disab,’ ‘disord,’ and
‘atyp’ as search terms, our IEEE Xplore search yielded 605
ICASSP papers. Using a Python script to extract metadata and
search the ISCA archives yielded an additional 565 papers pub-
lished at Interspeech and its predecessors, EuroSpeech and the
International Conference on Speech and Language Processing
(ICSLP).
We reduced this initial corpus of 1170 papers to 155 papers
by only including papers that explicitly mention developmental
neurodivergent conditions affecting speech in their text: stut-
tering, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD/ADD),
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), Bipolar Disorder (BD), and
Down Syndrome (DS). Upon closer reading by the research
team, an additional 38 papers were excluded because they did
not meet the inclusion criteria of being about speech and focus-
ing on the conditions mentioned above (e.g., some papers only
mention stuttering as an example of disfluency in their abstract
or use electromagnetic – but no speech – signals).
The finalized corpus of papers our team analyzed in-depth
includes 117 papers published from 1976 to 2025 at Interspeech
(75 papers), ICASSP (33 papers), ICSLP (5 papers), and Eu-
roSpeech (4 papers). Within this corpus, the number of publica-
tions addressing neurodivergence in speech technology started
to increase in the 2010s with the highest number of papers pub-
lished in 2025 (Fig. 1a), indicating a rising interest in address-
ing topics of neurodiversity and accessibility. We also find that
the rising interest in neurodivergent speech has outpaced the
overall growth of the field. Although it remains a relatively
small research area, the percentage of Interspeech publications
on neurodivergent speech has increased in general since 2010,
reaching nearly 0.8% of all Interspeech publications in recent
years (Fig. 1b). Among this growing body of research, stutter-
ing and autism were the most studied conditions, with 52 and
50 papers, respectively. Bipolar disorder (12 papers), Down
syndrome (3 papers), and ADHD/ADD (1 paper) were less fre-
quent. 8 papers examined other conditions (e.g., depression, de-
velopmental language disorder (DLD), dysphonia) in addition
to one of the target conditions. Fig. 2 illustrates the temporal
trends of different neurodivergence-related topics in our corpus,
showing a substantial increase in research interests in stuttering
and ASD in recent years. ASD gained significant traction in
2013 when Interspeech hosted the “Computational Paralinguis-
tic Challenge” which included a sub-challenge to classify ASD
and non-ASD speech [31]. Since then, the topic has received
sustained interest from the Interspeech community. Stuttering,
on the other hand, has only recently become a research focus.
Between 2021 and 2025, stuttering was the topic of almost 62%
of papers about neurodivergent speech, a large increase from
14% in the 2016–2020 period.
To understand how neurodivergent speech research is ini-
4366
Table 1:Paper evaluation rubric
Dimension Manual Coding Method
Inclusion CriteriaIs about speech? [Yes / No]
Is about stuttering, ADHD, ASD, bipolar, or Down syndrome? [Yes / No]
Paper TypeTopic: Which topics related to neurodiversity does the paper address? [ADHD / Autism / Bipolar / Down Syndrome /
Stuttering / Other]
Other Topic (if “Other” selected): short description
Paper Type [Full paper / Challenge paper / Show & Tell / Workshop Paper / Speech]
Main ContributionMain Contribution [Model / Insight about condition / Dataset / Artifact / Other]
Main Contribution: short description
Intended Use CaseUse Cases [Diagnosis/Detection / Intervention for technology / Intervention for PWD / Intervention for speech /
Masking/Hiding / Prevention / Other]
Use Case: short description
Intended audience/end users [Professionals working with PWD / PWD / Other]
Intended audience/end users: short description
Data PracticeData Source [Existing dataset / New data]
Data Source: short description of collection method and stakeholders involved
Annotation [Used existing annotations / Added new/additional annotation]
Annotation: short description of who annotated, what method was used
Annotators [Researchers / Professionals/clinicians / PWD / Non-experts / Unknown/other]
EvaluationHuman Evaluation [Yes / No]
If conducted: short description of who evaluated (PWD, clinicians, etc.)
Subjective Metrics: short description of subjective metrics used, e.g., PWD experiences, PWD raters
Objective Metrics: short description of objective metrics used, e.g., accuracy, F1
LanguageInstances of ableism-associated language: use of terms such as “fix,” “hide,” “disease,” “cure”
tiated, operationalized, and applied in relation to real-world
contexts and stakeholders, we critically examined each paper’s
research topic, primary contribution, motivating use case, in-
tended audience and end users, data sources, data annotation
methods, evaluation processes and metrics, and use of ableist-
style language (Table 1). Our analysis, drawing from both con-
tent and discourse methods, foregrounds not only thecontent
of each individual paper but also how itdeliversits content
through words, tables, and imagery [32, 33]. Papers were split
up and coded independently by the research team members. We
met weekly to discuss observations and questions, and to en-
sure alignment on evaluation criteria. The full corpus can be
accessed at doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20754795.
4. Results
The research in this corpus is largely technical and primarily
aims to assist clinicians, creating an outsized impact of re-
search from medicalized perspectives of neurodivergent con-
ditions over those from PWD themselves. The following sec-
tions provide high-level observations of how neurodivergence
is viewed and researched in speech science and technology. We
find tendencies to medicalize, distance, and other neurodiver-
gence in surveyed papers. As a result, existing studies often
adopt ableist-style language (e.g., aiming to “correct” neurodi-
vergent traits) and rarely consult with or involve PWD directly
at any point in the research process. We use these insights to
propose opportunities for fairer and more inclusive speech sci-
ence and technology in the Discussion section.
4.1. Medicalizing Conditions
The reviewed speech technology research often viewed neu-
rodivergence through a medicalized lens. Despite the overall
growing number of studies investigating neurodivergence and
speech (Fig. 1a), the people benefiting from these novel mod-
els, insights, and systems were oftencliniciansworking with
PWD rather than PWD themselves.
Professionals working with PWD were the target audience
of the proposed technological innovations in 56% of papers. In
comparison, PWD were the target end users in 16% of papers.
This focus on clinical contexts and audiences is also reflected in
the intended use cases (Fig. 3a) and main contributions (Fig. 3b)
of the corpus.
Almost 60% of papers contributed a novel model or training
method (“Model”). 25% generated new insights into the con-
dition under study (“Insight about condition”), which includes
speech patterns and characteristics of people with the condi-
tion. 13 papers developed or tested an interactive system (“Ar-
tifact”) and 13 papers presented a new dataset (“Dataset”). An
additional 13 papers made other contributions, such as insights
about speech production, data collection methods, or analyses
of existing models, methods, and systems. Over time, and with
advancements in AI/ML research, the number of model contri-
butions increased significantly within the last decade, constitut-
ing∼70% of publications from 2016–2025.
As evident from Fig. 3a, diagnosis and detection are by far
the most common use cases. In fact, 78% of papers in our
corpus framed their contribution around diagnosing and detect-
ing disfluencies or other speech characteristics (e.g., prosody,
mood). This trend has been consistent over time: In the three
decades since 1996, “diagnosis and detection” remained the top
use case that motivated the neurodivergent speech research cov-
ered by our review (see Fig. 3a). Many of these papers propose
systems, methods, or models to help clinicians and speech ther-
apists count, classify, and annotate disfluencies to aid the diag-
nosis of stuttering or ASD (e.g., [34, 35, 36, 37]). The overall
goal of these contributions is to make diagnosis and detection
less labor-intensive for clinicians. There was little focus on how
4367
0
20
40
60
1976-1985 1986-1995 1996-2005 2006-2015 2016-2025
years
publication count
Stated use case
Diagnosis/Detection
Intervention for technology
Intervention for PwD
Intervention for speech
Masking/Hiding
Prevention
Other
(a)Distribution of stated use cases
0
20
40
60
1976-1985 1986-1995 1996-2005 2006-2015 2016-2025
years
publication count
Type of contribution
Model
Insight about condition
Dataset
Artifact
Other (b)Distribution of main contributions
Figure 3:The evolution of claimed contributions and stated use cases by surveyed papers over five decades
PWD would be affected by these innovations.
In comparison, fewer papers focused on interventions tar-
geting existing technologies (e.g., improving ASR for stut-
tered speech [38]), PWD (e.g., developing a symptom mon-
itoring system to be used by PWD [39]), or speech itself
(e.g., modifying speech to increase prosody [40]). However,
such intervention-