Improving Cross-Dataset Speech Intelligibility Prediction for
Hearing-Impaired Listeners with Few-Shot Adaptation
Guojian Lin1, Xuefei Wang1, Ryandhimas E. Zezario2, Yu Tsao2, Fei Chen1,∗∗
1 Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2 Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
12432635@mail.sustech.edu.cn, fchen@sustech.edu.cn
Abstract
Speech intelligibility prediction models suffer substantial per-
formance degradation when generalized to unseen datasets. In
real-world scenarios, subjective listening evaluations are costly
and limited, resulting in scarce labeled data for cross-dataset
adaptation, which further challenges the development of accu-
rate and generalizable evaluation models. To address this issue,
we propose CFA-SIPNet, a speech intelligibility prediction net-
work for hearing-impaired (HI) listeners based on cross-domain
few-shot adaptation with adapter modules and contrastive learn-
ing. Experimental results show that CFA-SIPNet achieves a rel-
ative RMSE reduction of 8.5%and a relative PCC improvement
of 4.2%over the state-of-the-art (SOTA) model in cross-dataset
prediction. With less than 20%of target-domain samples, CFA-
SIPNet outperforms models trained on the full in-domain target
dataset. These results validate the effectiveness of CFA-SIPNet
in enhancing cross-dataset generalization.
Index Terms: Speech intelligibility prediction, cross-dataset
generalization, few-shot adaptation, hearing-impaired listener
1. Introduction
Accurate and generalizable speech intelligibility assessment for
hearing-impaired (HI) listeners is crucial for hearing aids (HA)
development. In the Clarity Prediction Challenge (CPC) se-
ries [1, 2, 3], top-performing models have primarily utilized
speech foundation models (SFMs), such as WavLM [4], Whis-
per [5] and Canary [6], with task-specific backbone networks to
achieve competitive prediction performance [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14]. Although these models have achieved remarkable per-
formance, they exhibited substantial performance degradation
when generalized to unseen listeners, acoustic environments or
HA settings [15], highlighting the challenge of developing ro-
bust and generalizable evaluation models. Such degradation is
mainly caused by domain shifts across datasets and the scarcity
of labeled target-domain data. Subjective listening tests with HI
listeners participation are time-consuming and costly, resulting
in limited annotated speech samples for training and adapta-
tion. Under such data-scarce condition, conventional training
approaches struggle to learn domain-invariant and discrimina-
tive speech representations, making cross-domain generaliza-
tion particularly challenging.
To enhance generalization across diverse conditions, sev-
eral cross-domain approaches have been investigated. ZipEn-
hancer + MP-SENet [16] utilized 2-clips augmentation strat-
egy, which generated augmented data by concatenating two au-
dio clips from each listener with a silence segment between.
The augmented data was merged with the source dataset for
**indicates the corresponding author.
training, leading to notable performance gains on the unseen
dataset. HASA-Net Large [17] adopted two-stage fine-tuning
with few target samples and exhibited significant generaliza-
tion improvement on the out-of-domain dataset over its base-
line version HASA-Net [18]. SSIP [19] replaced audiograms
with intelligibility scores as input features and predicted scores
of unseen audio using limited seen audio-score pairs, improving
prediction performance for unseen listeners.
However, existing approaches still suffer from several lim-
itations. Data augmentation generates additional training sam-
ples from the target-domain dataset, yet these augmented sam-
ples are constructed from the full set of annotated data. Conse-
quently, this strategy does not fundamentally reduce the model’s
reliance on annotated data and remains less suitable for sce-
narios with limited labeled samples. Moreover, existing gen-
eralization approaches primarily enhance domain adaptation by
minimizing point-wise regression error between predicted in-
telligibility scores and their corresponding ground-truth labels.
Although these approaches are effective for intelligibility pre-
diction, they do not explicitly model the differences among
speech samples with different intelligibility scores. Conse-
quently, discriminative feature distinctions between high- and
low-intelligibility speech are insufficiently emphasized, limit-
ing the ability to learn representations that generalize across un-
seen speech samples with varying intelligibility scores.
To address these limitations, we propose a cross-domain
few-shot adaptation based network called CFA-SIPNet for
speech intelligibility prediction. The proposed CFA-SIPNet
consists of two stages: source-domain pretraining and target-
domain few-shot adaptation, following transfer learning [20]
paradigm. During few-shot adaptation, lightweight adapters
[21] and contrastive learning [22] are introduced to capture
more discriminative and generalizable intelligibility-related
speech representations under limited supervision. Experimen-
tal results show that CFA-SIPNet outperforms SOTA model
ZipEnhancer + MP-SENet in cross-dataset prediction. Notably,
with less than 20%of target-domain samples for few-shot adap-
tation, CFA-SIPNet achieves performance superior to models
trained on the full target dataset, highlighting its strong transfer-
ability and adaptation capability. Moreover, comparisons with
other cross-domain strategies show the advantages of the few-
shot adaptation. Additionally, ablation study further confirms
the complementary roles of source pretraining and few-shot
adaptation, validating their effectiveness for improving gener-
alization performance.
2. Methods
Figure 1 shows the overall architecture of the proposed CFA-
SIPNet, consisting of supervised pretraining on source domain
2557
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1567
Figure 1:Overall architecture of the proposed CFA-SIPNet. Gray modules indicate that parameters are frozen in few-shot adaptation.
and few-shot adaptation described in Section 2.1 and 2.2.
2.1. Supervised Pretraining on Source Domain
In this stage, supervised pretraining is performed on the source
domain. As shown in Figure 1 (a), the pretrained model com-
prises a SFM fusion module and a backbone network. The ar-
chitecture of the SFM fusion module is illustrated in Figure 1
(c). It processes the left- and right- channel speech signals sep-
arately using pretrained WavLM and Whisper models to ex-
tract high-level representations, which are subsequently con-
catenated along the feature dimension to obtain the SFM fused
representations. Then, temporal interleaved concatenation is
adopted to integrate the left- and right-fused representations.
The backbone network further processes the fused representa-
tions using positional encoding followed by three Transformer
encoder layers to model temporal dependencies and contextual
relationships. The embeddings from the last Transformer en-
coder layer are passed through an MLP and a global average
pooling layer to output the predicted intelligibility score.
Supervised pretraining is conducted on the entire source-
domain dataset. Unlike existing models that primarily employ
mean squared error (MSE) as objective function, we addition-
ally introduce rank-based contrastive loss to preserve the rela-
tive ordering of intelligibility. The pretraining objective func-
tionL source integrates MSE lossL MSE and rank-based con-
trastive lossLrank, which are defined as follows:
LMSE = 1
B
BX
i=1
(yi−ˆyi)2,(1)
Lrank = 1
B2
BX
i=1
BX
j=1
[(ˆyi−ˆyj)−(y i−yj)]2,(2)
Lsource =λL MSE + (1−λ)L rank,(3)
whereBdenotes the number of samples in a batch.ˆy i andˆyj
respectively denote the predicted intelligibility scores of sample
iandj.y i andy j respectively denote the ground-truth intelli-
gibility scores of sampleiandj.λis the weighting factor for
the loss function. Then, the parameters of the pretrained model
are optimized by solving:
θ∗
s = arg min
θ
1
Ns
NsX
i=1
Lsource
 
fθ(xs
i ),ys
i

,(4)
whereθrepresents the pretrained model parameters andθ ∗
s rep-
resents the optimal parameters obtained through supervised pre-
training.N s represents total number of the source-domain sam-
ples.x s
i andys
i separately denote thei-th speech sample and its
ground-truth score.
2.2. Few-Shot Adaptation
In this stage, the pretrained model is transferred to the target do-
main and initialized with the optimal parameters obtained from
supervised pretraining. A limited number of speech samples are
randomly selected from the target-domain dataset to construct
the few-shot set, which is used to fine-tune the pretrained model.
As shown in Figure 1 (b)(c)(d), during fine-tuning stage, the
parameters of the gray modules including SFM Fusion module,
positional encoding and Transformer encoders are frozen, while
the parameters of the adapters, the embedding module, and the
MLP for score estimation are updated. Figure 1 (b) illustrates
the framework of the few-shot adaptation. To enable parameter-
efficient knowledge transfer, lightweight adapter modules are
inserted into each Transformer encoder of the backbone net-
work, as shown in Figure 1 (d), following the approach in [23].
Each adapter adopts a bottleneck architecture to process the in-
put SFM fused representations. The representations are first
projected to a lower-dimensional space of 128 through a linear
layer, followed by a ReLU activation. The compressed repre-
sentations are then mapped back to the original dimensionality
through the second linear layer. A dropout layer is applied be-
fore producing the output representations.
To enhance discriminative capability across different
speech intelligibility, embedding contrastive learning based on
ground-truth intelligibility differences is employed. As shown
in Figure 1 (b), the embedding module performs temporal pool-
ing and dimensionality reduction on the output representations
2558
from the last Transformer encoder layer to generate the compact
utterance-level embeddings. Subsequently, contrastive learning
based on intelligibility differences is employed to refine the em-
bedding space, enabling the model to capture more discrimina-
tive and structured intelligibility-related representations. The
objective is to maximize the similarity between embeddings
corresponding to similar intelligibility scores, while minimiz-
ing the similarity between embeddings associated with distinct
intelligibility scores. Formally, for any sample pair (i,j) within
a batch, we compute the absolute difference∆ ij between their
ground-truth intelligibility scores and determine positive and
negative samples on difference as follows:
∆ij =|y i−yj|,(5)
tij =
(
1,∆ ij <τ,
−1,∆ ij≥τ. (6)
whereτdenotes the threshold used to determine positive and
negative sample pairs and is set to 0.4.t ij = 1 indicates that
samplesiandjform a positive pair, whilet ij = -1 denotes a
negative pair.
Then, by maximizing the cosine similarity between posi-
tive sample embeddings and minimizing that between negative
sample embeddings, the representations corresponding to dif-
ferent intelligibility scores are further separated in the embed-
ding space. Based on this objective, the contrastive lossL ij
between samplesiandj, as well as the overall embedding con-
trastive lossLembed are calculated as follows:
Lij =
(
1−cosine similarity(ei,ej), t ij = 1,
max(0,cosine similarity(ei,ej)), t ij =−1, (7)
Lembed = 2
B(B−1)
X
i<j
Lij,(8)
whereBrepresents the number of speech samples in a batch.
ei,ej denote the output embeddings of sampleiandj. Finally,
the total loss functionLfor model fine-tuning is the weighted
sum ofLMSE ,Lrank andLembed,
L=λ 1LMSE +λ 2Lrank +λ 3Lembed (9)
whereλ 1,λ 2,λ 3 are weight coefficients used to balance the
impact of three losses.
3. Experiments
3.1. Dataset
In the experiments, two binaural speech intelligibility datasets
were employed: CPC3 dataset [3] and Arehart dataset [24].
•CPC3 dataset: The CPC3 dataset from the 3rd Clarity Pre-
diction Challenge was used as thesource-domain dataset.
It contains HA processed speech signals with a sampling rate
of 32 kHz, accompanied by intelligibility scores and hearing
severity information from 33 HI listeners. Following the offi-
cial data split, 15,464 samples were used for pretraining and
7,674 samples for test to select the optimal model in source-
domain pretraining.
•Arehart dataset: The Arehart dataset includes speech intelli-
gibility scores from 15 normal-hearing (NH) listeners and 15
HI listeners, with each listener evaluating 540 samples. We
adopted 8,100 speech samples with a sampling rate of 22.05
kHz from all the HI listeners astarget-domain dataset. Fol-
lowing [16], the dataset was split into training set with 6,480
Table 1:Performance comparison between CFA-SIPNet and
other models on Arehart test set. FSA means the few-shot adap-
tation in CFA-SIPNet.
Model Method RMSE PCC
CPC2 Champion a [9] Full Training 27.00 0.72
ZipEnhancer + MP-SENet a [16] Full Training 26.12 0.73
CPC2 Champion b [9] Zero-Shot 32.86 0.62
ZipEnhancer + MP-SENet b [16] Zero-Shot 31.52 0.64
ZipEnhancer + MP-SENet b [16] 2-Clips 28.48 0.72
CFA-SIPNet b FSA26.05 0.75
Arehart dataset evaluation setting: a Within dataset b Cross dataset
samples from 12 listeners and test set with 1,620 samples
from 3 listeners who were entirely unseen during training.
3.2. Experimental Details
The root mean square error (RMSE) and the Pearson correla-
tion coefficient (PCC) were adopted as performance evaluation
metrics. Speech samples were resampled to 16 kHz and zero-
padded to 9 seconds. WavLM-Large and Whisper-Large v3
were adopted as the SFM backbones. During source-domain
pretraining, the model was trained for 30 epochs on the full
training set using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of
1e-4. The best-performing model on the source-domain test
set was selected for cross-domain transfer. The loss weight-
ing coefficientλwas set to 0.5. For few-shot adaptation,100
speech samples were randomly selected from each listener in
target-domain dataset to construct thefew-shot set. To mitigate
overfitting to specific score ranges, we maintained a relatively
uniform distribution of intelligibility scores within the selected
few-shot samples. The learning rate was reduced to 5e-5, and
the model was fine-tuned for 15 epochs. The loss weighting
coefficients were set toλ 1 = 0.5,λ 2 = 0.2, andλ 3 = 0.3.
4. Results and Discussion
4.1. Performance Comparison on Target-domain Dataset
with Other Models
In the first experiment, we compare the performance of CFA-
SIPNet with existing models, namely CPC2 Champion [9] and
ZipEnhancer + MP-SENet [16], on target-domain Arehart test
set. These models adopt zero-shot, where no target-domain data
is used, and data augmentation strategy called 2-Clips, which
generates additional training samples for each listener with the
equal number to the target-domain training set. ZipEnhancer
+ MP-SENet with 2-Clips achieves SOTA cross-dataset perfor-
mance, whereas zero-shot results in significantly degraded per-
formance. We also compare CFA-SIPNet with existing models
trained under the within-dataset setting with full training strat-
egy, where the entire target-domain training set is used.
As shown in Table 1, CFA-SIPNet achieves significantly
superior cross-dataset prediction performance to ZipEnhancer
+ MP-SENet with 2-Clips, reducing the RMSE from 28.48 to
26.05 and increasing the PCC from 0.72 to 0.75. Moreover,
with less than 20%of the target-domain training set, CFA-
SIPNet outperforms existing models with full training, indi-
2559
Figure 2:The RMSE and PCC results on Arehart test set under
different numbers of target-domain samples.
Table 2:Performance on Arehart test set using different training
or adaptation strategies.
Target Data Strategy RMSE PCC
100 / Listener
In-Domain Training 27.23 0.72
Joint Training 26.89 0.73
Full-Finetuning 26.55 0.74
Few-Shot Adaptation26.05 0.75
cating that it achieves favorable performance while dramati-
cally reducing the amount of annotated training data. These re-
sults demonstrate that CFA-SIPNet can capture robust domain-
generalizable features from limited labeled samples, yielding
performance comparable to that of fully in-domain trained mod-
els, which highlights its strong transferability and advantages in
improving cross-domain generalization.
4.2. Effects of Target-domain Data Scale and Different
Strategies on Model Performance
In the second experiment, we compare the proposed few-shot
adaptation with the baseline training strategy joint training un-
der different sizes of few-shot set to determine the most ap-
propriate value ofK. The number of target samplesKis se-
lected from[0,25,50,100,200,540]. For joint training, the
entire source-domain dataset and the few-shot set are merged
to train the model using the architecture in Figure 1 (a). As il-
lustrated in Figure 2, few-shot adaptation consistently achieves
lower RMSE and higher PCC than joint training across all val-
ues ofK. Under equal data conditions, few-shot adaptation cap-
tures more effective domain information, enabling the model
to better adapt to the target domain and mitigate domain shift.
Few-shot adaptation withK= 100achieves a PCC of 0.75,
which reaches the performance upper bound achieved with full
target-domain adaptation; the RMSE of 26.05 is close to the
upper limit of 25.40. Further increasing the number of target
samples results in only marginal performance gains. There-
fore,K= 100is selected as the default setting. These re-
sults demonstrate that the proposed adaptation strategy explic-
itly models intelligibility-related discriminative features, en-
abling the model to learn more effective domain-specific rep-
resentations with limited samples.
In the next experiment, we compare the few-shot adaptation
with other strategies as shown in Table 2. In-domain training
refers to training the model solely on the few-shot set without
leveraging source-domain knowledge. Full-finetuning updates
the parameters of all layers of the pretrained model during adap-
tation. It can be observed that few-shot adaptation achieves the
best performance among all strategies, further validating its su-
Table 3:Results of ablation study on Arehart test set. ”w/o”
means without.
Target Data Model RMSE PCC
100 / Listener
w/o Adapter + ECL 28.87 0.71
w/o Source Pretraining 26.91 0.73
CFA-SIPNet26.05 0.75
periority in enhancing cross-domain generalization.
4.3. Impacts of Source Pretraining and Adaptation Mod-
ules on Model Performance
In the third experiment, we conduct ablation study to investi-
gate the effects of source-domain pretraining and cross-domain
adaptation modules on target-domain prediction performance.
“w/o Adapter + ECL” denotes that adapters and the embedding
contrastive learning (ECL) component are removed during the
few-shot adaptation stage and the parameters of MLP for score
estimation are optimized using the few-shot set. “w/o Source
Pretraining” represents that the source-domain pretraining stage
is removed and the model is directly trained on the few-shot
set. During training, the parameters of the adapters, embed-
ding module and the MLP are optimized. As shown in Table 3,
removing either the Adapter + ECL modules or source pretrain-
ing leads to noticeable performance degradation. The degra-
dation caused by removing Adapter + ECL is more significant
than that caused by removing source pretraining. This observa-
tion indicates that explicitly modeling intelligibility-related dis-
criminative information in the target domain plays a more crit-
ical role in improving generalization. Moreover, CFA-SIPNet
that integrates both source-domain pretraining and Adapter +
ECL has achieved the best performance. These results con-
firm the complementary effects of transferable source-domain
knowledge and target-domain intelligibility-aware feature dis-
crimination in enhancing model generalization. The paradigm
of pretraining and adaptation better aligns with the practical ap-
plication of speech intelligibility prediction models.
5. Conclusion
In this study, we propose CFA-SIPNet based on few-shot adap-
tation for cross-dataset speech intelligibility prediction for HI
listeners, which introduces adapters and contrastive learning
to capture discriminative intelligibility-related representations.
Experimental results show that CFA-SIPNet significantly out-
performs the SOTA model on cross-dataset evaluation, achiev-
ing a relative 8.5%RMSE reduction and a relative 4.2%im-
provement in PCC. With less than 20%of target-domain sam-
ples, CFA-SIPNet surpasses models trained on the full target-
domain dataset, demonstrating its effectiveness in improving
transferability and generalization capability. Additionally, the
proposed few-shot adaptation achieves superior performance
compared to other strategies, highlighting the importance of
explicitly modeling intelligibility-related feature discrimination
for domain adaptation. Furthermore, the integration of source-
domain pretraining and few-shot adaptation exhibits comple-
mentary effects in improving cross-dataset generalization. In
future work, we will explore the application of the proposed
framework in more complex acoustic environments and across
a wider range of listeners.
2560
6. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Key Research
and Development Program of China (2025YFF0518003,
2023YFF1203502), the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (62371217), Shenzhen Key Technology Program Fund-
ing (JSGG20220831103803006), and the Center for Computa-
tional Science and Engineering at Southern University of Sci-
ence and Technology.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
All (co-)authors are responsible and accountable for the work
and content of the paper, and consent to its submission. Gener-
ative AI tools were used for editing and polishing manuscripts,
but were not used for producing a significant part of the
manuscript.