Disentangling sociophonetic and physiological variation in /s/ acoustics across
12 languages
Massimo Lipari ID 1,∗∗, Morgan Sonderegger ID 1, Meghan Clayards ID 1
1 McGill University, Canada
massimo.lipari@mail.mcgill.ca, morgan.sonderegger@mcgill.ca, meghan.clayards@mcgill.ca
Abstract
Sibilants, especially /s/, display gendered variation across
languages. From acoustic data alone, it can be hard to determine
whether this variation is due to performance of social identity or
to physiology, e.g. vocal tract length (VTL) variation. In causal
terms, there is a direct effect of gender on sibilant acoustics and
an indirect effect mediated by VTL, which must be teased apart.
To this end, a speaker’s VTL can be estimated from their vowel
formants, though the consistency of this measure’s relationship
to sibilant acoustics is largely untested. Using a new multilin-
gual phonetic database of 12 languages (>1,300 speakers) and
the tools of causal mediation analysis, we investigate the rela-
tionship between VTL and /s/ peak frequency and its causal role
in gender effects. We find that estimated VTL predicts peak
well across languages. While there are gender differences in
peak across nearly all languages, the relative contributions of
physiology and performance vary considerably.
Index Terms: sibilant, vocal tract length, gender, sociophonet-
ics, causal inference, mediation analysis
1. Introduction
Differences between male and female speakers in the acoustics
of sibilant fricatives are frequently reported across languages,
e.g., [1, 2, 3]. At least some of this variation is commonly as-
sumed to be an artefact of physiology: it is thought that dif-
ferences in average vocal tract length (VTL) between men and
women will be reflected in the length of the front cavity in
sibilants—and thus in the frequency of the main resonance [4].
Sometimes, however, a physiological explanation can be ruled
out, providing evidence that speakers manipulate sibilant acous-
tics to perform gender or other aspects of their social identity.
For example, gender-differentiated productions of English /s/
[5, 6] and of Mandarin /s,C/ [7] have been observed in children
as young as 4 or 5, at an age when sex-based differences in vocal
tract morphology are small [8]. In Glaswegian /s/, moreover, the
effect of gender is moderated by a social variable, namely class,
presumably unrelated to anatomy: working-class girls produce
sibilants much more similarly to male speakers than middle-
class and older women do, suggesting they override the effects
of physiology in an attempt to sound more masculine [9]. In
these cases, the ability to tease apart the contributions of phys-
iology and performance is central to interpreting the observed
gender effects. But absent such particular circumstances, how
feasible is this in general using only acoustic data (since speak-
ers’ body size measures are usually not available), given that the
extent to which gender is performed through any given acoustic
dimension is language- and community-specific [10]?
**indicates the corresponding author.
To answer this question, we can begin by estimating speak-
ers’ VTL from their vowel formant measures, as in [11, 12].
Despite underlying mainstream approaches to vowel normaliza-
tion (e.g., [13]), a standard step in analyzing vowels, this idea
has only rarely been applied to sibilants. Promisingly, [14] finds
increased separability of the population-level distributions of /s/
and /S/ or /C/ in French and Japanese (respectively) using a simi-
lar method. Rather than just a methodological convenience, this
may even be a cognitively plausible model of sibilant percep-
tion: [15, 16] show how listeners adjust their /s/ – /S/ boundary
in perception as a function of the formant frequencies of sur-
rounding vowels (as also seen for vowels: [17]). To be sure, the
relationship between VTL and spectral properties in sibilants
may not be as straightforward as in vowels. The difference in
average length between male and female vocal tracts does not
result from uniform scaling: most of the difference lies in pha-
ryngeal cavity size, whereas the region of the vocal tract where
sibilants are articulated differs much less [18, 19]. Moreover,
speakers may compensate for differences in VTL by subtly ad-
justing their articulation (tongue and/or lip position) to achieve
a desired acoustic target [20]. How predictive VTL truly is of
front cavity length is thus an open question.
This study investigates the extent to which anatomical and
social variation can be disentangled in sibilants from acoustic
data across languages and speech communities. This problem is
one of causal inference. Gender (or sex) is believed to causally
affect /s/ acoustics in two ways: directly, corresponding roughly
to the performed element of gender, or indirectly through its
causal effect on VTL, corresponding roughly to the physiolog-
ical element. To evaluate the contributions of these two path-
ways, we employ causal mediation analysis [21], which has
seen previous use in phonetics to determine the causal structure
of stop lenition [22]. We present a large new purpose-built mul-
tilingual phonetic database containing data from 12 languages
and >1,300 speakers. We focus here on /s/, because of both its
typological frequency and the special attention it has received
in the sociophonetic literature. Our research questions are:
1. How (much) do VTL, gender, and their interaction affect /s/
acoustics across languages?
2. To what extent are apparent gender differences in /s/ acous-
tics due to physiology vs. performance?
2. Data & methods
2.1. A new multilingual speech database
Several large multilingual speech datasets have been released
in recent years (e.g., [23, 24, 25, 26]). However, few are well-
suited to comparing patterns of potentially socially-driven inter-
speaker variation across languages: the number of speakers may
3312
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2975
Table 1:List of languages examined in the study (with sources
for corpora), with the number of speakers/tokens after filtering.
Language Speakers (F) V owel tokens /s/ tokens
Czech [28] 100 (44) 372,971 9,694
Polish [28] 98 (66) 272,738 2,698
Russian [28] 115 (55) 232,663 6,096
Afrikaans [29] 207 (106) 420,122 8,518
English [30] 132 (67) 404,617 17,919
Swedish [28] 98 (48) 247,621 11,110
French [28] 99 (50) 379,419 23,247
Spanish [28] 97 (53) 244,733 11,039
Arabic [28] 72 (38) 162,764 2,303
Japanese [28] 137 (34) 416,478 19,962
Korean [28] 99 (50) 274,286 12,146
Mandarin [28] 132 (68) 377,860 4,217
Total 1,386 (679) 3,806,272 128,949
be limited for some or all languages, and speaker labels and/or
metadata may be missing entirely. To address these limitations,
we assembled a new multilingual speech database by collating
data from existing automatic speech recognition corpora (like
[23, 25]), where each includes audio and the necessary metadata
(minimally, speaker labels and gender information) for several
dozen or more speakers. For the sake of comparability, all se-
lected corpora consist solely of read speech. All data are sam-
pled at a consistent rate of 16 kHz: this offers spectral infor-
mation up to 8 kHz, which is important because sibilant spec-
tra have substantial energy at least as high as this frequency
[27]. We chose corpora that could be easily force aligned, i.e.
where recordings were already orthographically transcribed and
a suitable pronunciation dictionary was available or creatable
via grapheme-to-phoneme (G2P) conversion.
The resulting resource spans a typologically diverse set
of 12 languages (cf. Table 1) and a total of 1,403 speakers.
Data are sourced from GlobalPhone [28], the NCHLT corpus
("clean" release) [29], and LibriSpeech (using a random sub-
set of the 100- and 300-hour partitions) [30]. Speaker labels
and gender information was extracted from the included meta-
data files.1 All languages were force aligned with the Montreal
Forced Aligner (MFA) [31]. For English, the MFA English
(US) ARPA pronunciation dictionary and pre-trained acous-
tic model were used. Custom acoustic models were trained
for all other languages. The supplied dictionary was gener-
ally used with minimal adaptation, with two exceptions. For
Arabic, the coverage of the dictionary was increased through
MFA’s built-in G2P functionality with a custom-trained model.
For Japanese, a custom dictionary was created with the rule-
based G2P utility Epitran [32]. The aligned corpora were sub-
sequently loaded into separate databases in the corpus manage-
ment software PolyglotDB [33] for further processing.
2.2. V owel measures & vocal tract length estimation
F1–F3 were measured at 33 % of duration for all vowel to-
kens longer than 50 ms for each language directly within
PolyglotDB, using the “basic” formant refinement procedure
[34]. This algorithm uses user-specified prototype distribu-
tions (means and covariance matrix for the first three formant
1For Polish, gender annotations were missing for several speakers,
and so this variable was coded impressionistically by the first author.
frequencies and bandwidths) for each phone to pick the opti-
mal LPC analysis per token from a set of candidates obtained
by varying the number of coefficients while fixing the formant
ceiling at 5500 Hz. Prototypes are then re-computed for each
speaker-phone pair and new winners are selected for each token,
with the process iterating up to 20 times (or until convergence).
Ideal prototypes would be obtained from hand-corrected for-
mant measures for a subset of the data under analysis; in prac-
tice, though, even rough prototypes produce much more reli-
able measures than using the same LPC parameters for all to-
kens. We thus mapped each phone in each language to the most
similar vowel from one of two existing sets of prototypes: one
obtained from the Buckeye corpus [35], and the other from a
hand-corrected set of Quebec French vowels [36].
For each token, formant measures were subsequently used
to estimate∆F, the average spacing between formants, which
is inversely proportional to VTL, using Eq. (1). More com-
plex VTL estimation procedures, where higher formants (which
vary less as a function of vocal tract shape) are effectively up-
weighted, have also been proposed [11, 37]. While these are ar-
gued to be more robust, in practice they appear to produce simi-
lar results as the simpler, less computationally intensive method
used here, at least when averaging across multiple vowels [12].2
∆F= 1
3 ×( F1
0.5 + F2
1.5 + F3
2.5)(1)
2.3. Sibilant spectral estimation & measures
All word-initial pre-vocalic /s/ tokens longer than 50 ms were
extracted for analysis. Multitaper spectra [38] with 8 tapers, a
time-bandwidth parameter of 4, and no pre-emphasis were com-
puted for a 20 ms interval centered at each token’s midpoint in
R [39]. We adapted a script from [40], which implements a nor-
malization procedure to correct for differences in recording con-
ditions: the amplitude of each spectral bin is normalized against
spectra of samples from periods of silence and of speech from
the same recording. The highest spectral peak above 1 kHz was
measured from each spectrum as a rough index of the lowest
front cavity resonance—and thus of front cavity length.
2.4. Final dataset & statistical analysis
Seventeen speakers (6 of Arabic, 3 of Afrikaans, 3 of Span-
ish, 2 of Czech, and 1 of each of French, Japanese, and Polish)
were excluded from the analysis: 10 of these were less than
16 years old (possibly pre-pubescent, and thus expected to pat-
tern differently), 4 had no usable /s/ tokens, and 3 showed an
unrealistically low mean spectral peak (below 3 kHz) suggest-
ing systematic data quality issues. The final dataset consists of
>3.8 million vowel tokens and 128,949 /s/ tokens across 1,386
speakers, distributed by language as in Table 1. Speaker means
for∆F(averaging first by word and then by vowel) and for
/s/ peak (averaging first by word and then by following vowel)
were calculated to serve as inputs to the regression analyses.
To perform the mediation analysis, we fit two linear mixed
effects regression models in R using thelme4package [41].
First (in the “full outcome” model), peak is regressed on∆F,
GENDER, and their interaction; second (in the “full mediator”
model),∆Fis regressed onGENDER. Both models included
maximal by-language random effects. The direct effect of gen-
der is given by theGENDERterm of the outcome model, be-
2In our data, by-speaker averages for∆Festimated with Eq. (1)
and for VTL estimated with the 0-intercept regression model proposed
in [37] were highly correlated (ρ=−0.926±0.008).
3313
cause of the inclusion of the control for VTL. In order to cal-
culate the indirect effect, theGENDERcoefficient in the medi-
ator model is multiplied by the∆Fcoefficient in the outcome
model. We used themediationpackage [42] to obtain esti-
mates with quasi-Bayesian confidence intervals for these quan-
tities. We also conducted separate mediation analyses for each
language, each time fitting a pair of models (the “by-language”
models) analogous to those described above (but without ran-
dom effects) to the given language’s data. In all models,∆F
values are centered around the mean and scaled by 2 standard
deviations, andGENDERis converted to a binary predictor and
centered around its mean (FEMALE≈ −0.51,MALE≈0.49).
All data and code are available on OSF: osf.io/m58e3/.
3. Results
3
4
5
6
7
8
0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3
ΔF (kHz)
Peak (kHz)
Gender
Female
Male
Figure 1:Predicted relationship between∆Fand /s/ peak fre-
quency by gender group in the full outcome model, averaging
across languages. Points indicate individual speaker averages.
The predicted effects of∆Fand gender on /s/ peak fre-
quency from the full outcome model, averaging across lan-
guages, are visualized in Fig. 1. This model has a condi-
tionalR 2 of 0.444, indicating that it accounts for nearly half
of the variation in peak; its marginalR 2 is 0.247, meaning just
less than a quarter of the variation is explained on a language-
independent basis. There is a strong and significant effect of
∆F( ˆβ= 547±217 Hz,p= 0.001): greater∆F(and
thus, shorter VTL) is associated with higher peak frequency.
The effect ofGENDER(i.e., its direct effect), however, is about
half as large and marginal ( ˆβ=−245±268 Hz,p= 0.10),
although it is in the expected direction (FEMALE>MALE).
There is no significant interaction betweenGENDERand∆F
( ˆβ= 91±308 Hz,p= 0.58): both gender groups show
qualitatively similar predicted∆Ftrends. The mediation anal-
ysis using the full models reveals that indirect effect of gender
(mediated by∆F) is significant and possibly larger than the
direct effect (−493±218 Hz,p <0.001). Indeed, the indi-
rect effect contributes substantially the total effect of gender,
(−738±244 Hz,p<0.001), which is what theGENDERterm
would capture in a model without∆F.
Figure 2 shows predictions from the full outcome model
broken down by language. The positive relationship between
∆Fand peak seen above holds in nearly all languages, with
some variation in the size of the effect (σ= 301 Hz): the asso-
Japanese Korean Mandarin
French Spanish Arabic
Afrikaans English Swedish
Czech Polish Russian
0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3
3
4
5
6
7
8
3
4
5
6
7
8
3
4
5
6
7
8
3
4
5
6
7
8
ΔF (kHz)
Peak (kHz)
Gender Female Male
Figure 2:Predicted relationship between∆Fand /s/ peak fre-
quency by gender group in the full outcome model, faceted by
language. Points indicate individual speaker averages.
ciation appears to be slightly stronger in English and Mandarin,
for example, than in other languages. Only Arabic bucks this
trend, with an effect of∆Fnot significantly different from zero.
There is considerably more cross-linguistic variation in the size
of theGENDEReffect (σ= 410Hz): for instance, English,
Arabic and Czech display large effects in the expected direc-
tion (FEMALE>MALE), whereas Japanese, Polish, and Russian
show no significant difference. Only Mandarin has a signifi-
cantGENDEReffect in the opposite direction: in this language,
the effect ofGENDEReffectively ‘undoes’ the effect of∆F, as
we might expect to see for working-class Glaswegian girls [9].
In most languages—except English and perhaps Afrikaans—
there is little evidence for an interaction betweenGENDERand
∆F, possibly in part because gender groups are relatively well-
separated by∆Fwithin each language.
The results of the by-language mediation analyses are re-
ported in Fig. 3. In three languages (Afrikaans, Czech, and
English), both the direct and indirect effects of gender are
significant—though in all of these, it is not clear which effect
is larger. These are cases where the mediation analysis con-
firms the existence of a socially-motivated effect of gender and
helps better estimate its true size. Half the languages show a
non-significant direct effect of gender: in all but one of these
six (Polish), however, the total effect is significant. This illus-
trates how failing to consider the effect of VTL risks unwarrent-
3314
-1
0
1
CzechPolishRussianAfrikaansEnglishSwedishFrenchSpanishArabic
JapaneseKoreanMandarin
Peak (kHz)
Gender effect (male − female)
Direct effect Mediated by ΔF Total effect
Figure 3:Results of the by-language causal mediation analyses.
edly licensing the conclusion that gender is being performed.
In some cases (e.g., Japanese and Russian), there is a signifi-
cant total effect despite both the direct and indirect effects being
non-significant—the data do not allow the two kinds of effects
to be teased apart. Finally, in Mandarin, there are significant
direct and indirect effects of similar magnitude, but of opposite
signs: they thus largely cancel each other out, leading to a small
and non-significant total effect. (Arabic shows a similar pattern,
but with the signs of the effects reversed and a borderline sig-
nificant total effect). Here, controlling for VTL reveals a social
effect that could otherwise have been missed.
4. Discussion
We find that∆Fshows a strong positive relationship with peak
frequency in /s/: this effect is consistent in direction, and also
largely in magnitude, across nearly all languages examined and
across gender groups. Peak thus by and large scales inversely
with VTL, just as formant frequencies do in vowels. This is not
a trivial result: articulatory variation, including compensation
for VTL to achieve a particular acoustic target, could have mud-
died this effect, at least in some languages or speech commu-
nities. Notably, we observe an effect of∆Feven in languages
with no total effect of gender (e.g., Mandarin and Polish), which
suggests articulatory compensation is constrained—possibly by
quantal effects (nonlinearities in the mapping between articula-
tion and acoustics known to limit articulatory variation in sibi-
lants, cf. [43, 44]). Only one language (Arabic) displays a
different pattern, with no significant effect of∆F—since this
is the language with the least speakers, it is not wholly clear
whether this is a robust result or the product of a limited sample
size and a few high-leverage datapoints. More data would help
better define the limits of possible cross-linguistic variation.
Additionally, we show how including VTL as a predictor
and considering its role in the causal chain helps clarify the in-
terpretation of apparent gender differences. We observe that the
mere presence of a total effect of gender in a given language
says little about whether it is due to physiological or social fac-
tors (or both). Strikingly, even the absence of a total effect can-
not be taken to suggest the absence of a direct and/or indirect
effect. Mediation analysis is thus needed to tease these effects
apart, though it may not always be sufficient: despite examining
a large number of speakers for each language, there remain oc-
casions where there is insufficient evidence to conclude the ex-
istence of either a direct or indirect effect, even in the presence
of a significant total effect of gender. In these instances, consid-
ering other kinds of evidence which rule out a physiological or
social explanation, as in [5, 6, 7, 9], may become crucial.3 Still,
that mediation analysis often does allow us to conclusively de-
termine whether physiology and/or performance is at play from
acoustic data alone—or at least whether any such conclusions
are possible from the data at hand—is a fundamentally positive
result. Importantly, the methodology used here is not particu-
lar to sibilants: it can be applied to any acoustic variable which
is thought to scale with VTL and have a performed component
(e.g., f0), which is a promising direction for future research.
It should be mentioned that we have made two simplifying
assumptions throughout this paper that require some qualifica-
tion. First,∆Fhas been treated as a “ground truth” measure
of VTL which reflects only physiological, and not social, varia-
tion. VTL, however, can be actively manipulated by speakers by
adjusting larynx height or lip position, and so may to some de-
gree itself be performed [4]. There could even be social grounds
for a correlation between VTL and peak frequency in sibilants,
if high- and low-frequency sounds across multiple acoustic cues
are ascribed a consistent social meaning (cf. Ohala’s “frequency
code” [45]). Second, because gender and sex are not distin-
guished in our data, sex-based morphological differences in vo-
cal tract shape (rather than size) [8, 18, 19] could in principle
be entering into the direct effect of gender here, rather than just
performance. These two caveats suggest that reexamining our
research questions using body size or vocal tract morphology
measures would be a useful contribution.
Finally, we note some difficulties encountered here in the
acoustic analysis of /s/. For one, overall peak frequency only
roughly indexes front cavity length, as the highest peak is often
(but not always) the lowest front cavity resonance [46]. Re-
cent work suggests this resonance is better tracked by restrict-
ing the search to a narrow, heuristically-determined range (e.g.,
3–7 kHz [47]). We did not adopt this approach here, however,
as ranges likely need to be set for each combination of speaker,
language, and phonological environment, and how to do this
automatically is an open problem. For another, the 16 kHz sam-
pling rate of the data may be somewhat low, as front cavity res-
onances above the 8 kHz Nyquist frequency may be possible for
some speakers—though there is no clear evidence of a ceiling
effect here, except perhaps in English-speaking women. Ad-
dressing these limitations may help recover additional signal.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we examined the causal structure of the rela-
tionship between gender/sex, vocal tract length (estimated from
vowel formants), and /s/ peak frequency in a large new cross-
linguistic speech database (12 languages, >1,300 speakers). We
found a relatively consistent relationship between VTL and
peak across languages, but considerable variation in the magni-
tude and significance of the direct effect of gender (roughly, its
social side) and of its indirect effect mediated by VTL (roughly,
its anatomical side). This serves as a case study in using causal
mediation analysis to disentangle the performed and physiolog-
ical aspects of gender differences in speech acoustics.
3Note that the style of speech examined here may be limiting the
size of the direct effect of gender: read speech is less conducive to the
performance of social identity than spontaneous speech. Our results
emphasize the kinds of insights offered by mediation analysis, but do
not necessarily paint a definitive picture of each community examined.
3315
6. Acknowledgments
This work was funded by SSHRC Doctoral Award #752-2024-
1371 and FRQSC B2Z Award #344938 to ML, Canada Re-
search Chair #CRC-20