‘I have to talk proper white ways’: Australian Aboriginal English Speakers’
Experiences with V oice Technologies
Celeste Rodríguez Louro ID 1,∗∗, Glenys Dale Collard ID 1, Hope Narrier ID 1, Katrina Cox ID 1, Lily
Hayward ID 1, Daniel Colbung ID 1, Ben Hutchinson ID 2,∗∗
1 Discipline of Linguistics / Language Lab, The University of Western Australia, Australia
2 Google Research, Australia
celeste.rodriguezlouro@uwa.edu.au, benhutch@google.com
Abstract
This article reports on a qualitative study investigating experi-
ences of Indigenous people in Australia with voice technologies.
Many Indigenous people in Australia speak Australian Abo-
riginal English, a variety which emerged as a result of forced
contact between Indigenous communities and English speakers.
It is widely used, yet is poorly supported by language technolo-
gies. Through Indigenous-led in-depth interviews, this research
explores user experiences, attitudes, responses, and challenges
encountered while interacting with various speech-enabled de-
vices and applications using Australian Aboriginal English. We
find that Indigenous users of ASR-powered technologies report
poor experiences with the technologies, which they see as work-
ing better for non-Indigenous people. They report switching to
speak like white people to get better ASR performance. Our
findings reveal significant pressure to speak ‘white way’ when
interacting with technology.
Index Terms: speech recognition, human-computer interaction,
Australian Aboriginal English
1. Introduction
Automated Speech Recognition (ASR) technologies have be-
come ubiquitous in everyday life. They are integrated into a wide
range of commercial and freely available products, including
virtual assistants, call centres, dictation products, and in-car inter-
active technologies [1]. ASR technologies are rapidly becoming
available in many language varieties, accompanied by promises
of inclusion for all the world [2]. However there is evidence that
ASR systems work poorly for minoritised language varieties,
such as African American English [3] or South Asian English
[4]. Furthermore, speakers of minoritised language varieties
experience negative psychological impacts when the technology
fails, such as feeling that technology wasn’t designed for them
[5]. Some members of minoritised language communities feel
that the computer doesn’t like how they are speaking [6], or that
their language variety is being judged as illegitimate [ 7], and
perform linguistic and cultural code switching to be understood
[8]. Whereas speakers of mainstream language varieties may
blame the ASR system for poor performance, speakers of mi-
noritised communities may blame themselves, and experience
a drop in self esteem or an increase in self consciousness about
their identity [9].
Of the 400+ ancestral Indigenous languages that existed
in Australia before European colonisation [10], most are either
extinct or critically endangered [ 11]. This is due to practices
of colonialism, which at various times included governments
**indicates the corresponding author.
forcibly separating Aboriginal children from their families and
forbidding Aboriginal children from speaking their languages
at school [12]. Most Indigenous people in Australia currently
speak Australian Aboriginal English, making it a strong encoder
of ethno-cultural identity [13]. This indigenised variety of En-
glish integrates features from English and Aboriginal ancestral
languages.
We adopt the position that Indigenous people using voice
technologies should be supported in using whichever of their lin-
guistic varieties that they prefer to use [14]. This premise raises
the question: what are the experiences of Australian Aboriginal
English speakers using currently available voice technologies?
This paper makes the following contributions. First, we report
on the first empirical study to explore the experiences of speak-
ers of an indigenised local variety of a global language when
using voice technologies. Second, we provide evidence that
ASR-powered technologies often fail for Australian Aborigi-
nal English speakers, and that Indigenous people in Australia
associate ASR performance with race. They report modifying
their voices to sound non-Indigenous to get better ASR perfor-
mance. Third, the reproduction of social and linguistic minori-
tisation by virtual assistants is extending public pressures to
conform to mainstream Englishes into private spaces such as
homes. Throughout the project, we emphasise the importance of
Indigenous participation and cultural safety.
2. Background and Related Work
This section discusses background material on Aboriginal En-
glish and related work on biases and harms of ASR systems.
2.1. Australian Aboriginal English
Australian Aboriginal English is a contact variety of English
used by Indigenous people in Australia [ 15]. It is particularly
prevalent across southern Australia where ancestral languages
are less widely spoken. In these contexts, Australian Aboriginal
English is used to strengthen Indigenous ways of being and com-
municating [16]. Australian Aboriginal English is the product
of forced contact between Indigenous people and the English-
speaking settler-colonialists. The English spoken by the British
was a powerful instrument used to strip Indigenous communities
of their ancestral rights [17].
The linguistic characteristics of Australian Aboriginal En-
glish distinguish it from mainstream English [ 16], including
its pronunciation, lexis, grammar, and discourse-pragmatics.
Pronunciation features include: frequent /h/-dropping and /h/-
addition; metathesis of ‘k’ and ‘s’ in the word ‘ask’, which is
pronounced ‘aks’; and default reduction of the ‘ing’ verbal suffix
to ‘in’ [18]. Grammatical features include double negatives as in
2868
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1595
‘never done nothing’; and double subjects as in ‘My niece, she
did it.’ Lexical features include lexical transfer such asblackfella,
meaning ‘black person/fellow’, and borrowings from ancestral
languages, such asdardy‘good/good looking’ from Nyungar
[19].
Experts remain ambivalent as to whether Australian Aborig-
inal English represents a single ethnolect, or whether different
varieties of Aboriginal English, or ‘Aboriginal Englishes’, ex-
ist across Australia [20]. Australian Aboriginal English is fre-
quently placed on a continuum that ranges from ‘lighter’ acrolec-
tal varieties (closer to standardised Australian English) to ‘heav-
ier’ basilectal varieties which are closer to Kriol, spoken across
northern Australia [21]. The basilectal varieties are mostly un-
intelligible to standardised English speakers, but the acrolectal
varieties are superficially similar to Australian English.
Because Australian Aboriginal English is English based,
it is sometimes socially stigmatised, erroneously classified by
laypeople as an incorrect version of English. As a result, L1
users of Australian Aboriginal English are often discriminated
against in schooling and legal settings [ 22, 23], perpetuating
invisibility of the variety and leading to the false perception
that its speakers are uneducated and rude [24]. These negative
attitudes are exacerbated because Australian Aboriginal English
is primarily oral, with no nationally adopted guidelines as to how
it should be written.
Indigenous people tend to find the use of direct questions
awkward or offensive [25], and these pragmatic considerations
continue in Australian Aboriginal English. Direct questions are
also likely to elicit misleading information; Indigenous people
have been known to answer ‘yes’ or agree with non-Indigenous
people even if the question is not fully understood—a phe-
nomenon known as ‘gratuitous concurrence’ [ 26]. To avoid
these limitations, researchers have used ‘yarning’, an Indigenous
cultural form of storytelling and conversation, to lead unstruc-
tured data collection with Indigenous communities who speak
Australian Aboriginal English [27, 28].
2.2. Biases in speech recognition technologies
There is no prior work on the performance of ASR on Australian
Aboriginal English. However studies have found that such ASR
technologies often exhibit poor performance for members of
other historically minoritised groups [ 29]. Most work in this
vein has to date been focused on African American English
(AAE) speakers [ 3, 30]. [ 31] explored how features of AAE
relate to failures of ASR technologies. [32] found that automated
captions for Black speakers were significantly less accurate than
those for white speakers. Beyond AAE, [ 33] noted that ASR
technologies exhibit poor performance for Native American, and
ChicanX users in the USA. [34] found that voice assistant users
with foreign accents are more likely to experience errors.
2.3. Psychological harms caused by ASR technologies
Prior research has found that when ASR systems make errors,
some members of minoritised language communities feel that
the computer doesn’t like how they are speaking [6], or that the
technology isn’t built for people like them [5]. Whereas speakers
of mainstream language varieties may blame the ASR system
for poor performance, speakers of minoritised communities may
blame themselves, and experience a drop in self esteem or an
increase in self consciousness about their identity [9]. They may
feel that their language variety is being judged as illegitimate
[7]. If ASR fails to meet expectations for speakers of Australian
Aboriginal English, all these impacts may be reproduced. Feel-
Age Count
16–24 10
25–34 10
35–44 6
45–54 6
55–64 4
65+ 2
Not provided 1
Gender Count
Female 23
Male 15
Non-binary 0
Not provided 1
Figure 1:Ages and genders of participants.
ings of shame or embarrassment might also arise if speakers
are self-conscious about their way of speaking being transcribed
and re-contextualised into contexts where mainstream written
English is the norm [35, 14].
3. Methods
A qualitative research approach was adopted, utilizing semi-
structured interviews to gather rich, descriptive data from Aborig-
inal English speakers who use voice technologies. The methods
were approved by the institutional review board at the authors’
university. Like [36], we also meet regularly with an Indigenous
Advisory Committee for guidance (for more details, see [ 14]).
We strive to employ Indigenous Research Assistants (RAs), and
to facilitate their engagement on the project not just as data
collectors but also in actively shaping the methods and the inter-
pretation of the data. While Collard, the project’s senior research
assistant, is also a project leader, four additional RAs were also
hired: Narrier, Cox, Hayward, and Colbung. All are First Nations
people of the Nyungar Nation of southwest Western Australia.
3.1. Participants
A total of 39 participants were recruited for the study, based
on their regular use of at least one speech-enabled device or
application. Requirements for eligibility included being available
for in-person interviews, identifying as Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander, and being 16 years or older. Participants were
aged from 16 to 92 (median of 33). Over 25 First Nations
were represented, with a majority from the Nyungar group, but
also from across Western Australia (a state roughly the size
of Western Europe) and from the Northern Territory. Further
demographic information is detailed in Figures 1 and 2.
3.2. Data Collection
Interviews were conducted in Aboriginal English, and led by
the RAs. Interviews were conducted in-person at convenient
locations, typically in private homes in the Perth metropolitan
area. They were carried out individually, but in some cases
two participants were interviewed together, providing a relaxed
environment for free-flowing discussion in keeping with cultural
norms of speakers of Aboriginal English [ 28, 37]. Interviews
had a median duration of 38 minutes, and were audio-recorded
with participants’ consent. The interview protocol was based on
previous studies such as [5]. Since the questions were written in
formal, technical language, the RAs found that they only elicited
short answers. The RAs were free to employ the protocol in
ways that were appropriate for them and the participants (see
pragmatic considerations in §2.1), and adapted the questions so
as to elicit rich data in semi-structured interviews. Participants
also provided written responses to five text prompts included on
2869
Affiliation Count Notes
Aboriginal 3 Generic affiliation.
Badimaya 2
Bardi 1
Goomala 1
Jigalong 1
Karrajarri 1
Larrakia 1
Martu 2
Naaguja 2
Nyungar 24 Collective bloc from south-
west Western Australia.
Wadjarri 4
Wakaya 1
Yamatji 4
(a)Counts of First Nations affiliations.
 (b)Approximate locations of First Nations of participants.
Figure 2:First Nations affiliations of participants. Each interviewee might identify with multiple First Nations, and might identify with
specific groups within each Nation.
a handout. Participants received $50 cash and a $100 gift card.
3.3. Data Processing and Analysis
The recorded interviews were transcribed, omitting topics of
conversation that strayed from voice technologies, for the privacy
and safety of participants. Then thematic analysis, as outlined
by [38], was employed to identify, and report patterns within the
data, using a combination of inductive and deductive analysis.
This involved a subset of the authors familiarising ourselves
with the data, identifying initial themes, reviewing, defining and
naming the themes, and discussing the emerging themes with
the entire project team including the Indigenous RAs.
4. Findings
Participants reported using ASR technologies in a variety of
locations and for a variety of use cases. The location most often
mentioned explicitly was in the car, although often home—the
location of the interviews—was the implied context. Other re-
ported locations where ASR was used included at work, and
on a golf course. The use cases most frequently mentioned by
participants were playing music, maps/navigation, and sending
text messages. Other reported use cases included calling people,
issuing commands to a virtual assistant, and searching for infor-
mation. Many participants also reported encountering speaker
identification technologies on the phone line for the Australian
Federal Government social security agency known as Centrelink.
Our findings reveal shared patterns in the experiences of Aus-
tralian Aboriginal English speakers when using ASR-powered
technologies. First, technology often fails for speakers, lead-
ing to feelings of frustration and abandoning ASR technologies.
Second, ASR needs to support diverse forms of Australian Abo-
riginal English. Third, speakers of Australian Aboriginal English
associate ASR performance with race, reporting that the technol-
ogy works better for white people and modifying their voices to
sound more like non-Indigenous people.
Finding 1: Speakers of Australian Aboriginal English report
frustration with poor handling of their variety, and giving
up.Participants reported ASR failing due to Aboriginal En-
glish’s differences from mainstream Australian English, e.g.,
‘it’s probably just not catered for our accents’[F25]. 1 Partici-
pants often blamed ASR errors on the way they use language,
such as speaking ‘too fast’, not speaking ‘clearly’, or their fail-
ure to speak mainstream English, with a few participants even
questioning whether their own intelligence or level of education
was the cause, e.g.,‘Am I a slow learner? What’s wrong with
me?’[M51], or‘maybe it’s cos I didn’t go to school or maybe
it’s because I have a low IQ’[F25]. A very common theme was
the frustration that participants felt when the technology failed:
‘Frustration is the biggest thing there’[M46]. Several partici-
pants reported that ASR’s failures to recognise words resulted in
frustration boiling over into anger, e.g.,‘it’s just frustrating and
makes me feel a bit angry with it’[F21]. Feelings of frustration
also led many Aboriginal English speakers to give up on ASR-
powered technologies, e.g.,‘So I just got annoyed with it and I
think I ended up giving it to someone else’[F43], or‘I turned
that part off, and now I just use it as a clock’[F44].
Finding 2: ASR needs to support diverse forms of Australian
Aboriginal English.Participants frequently mentioned that
ASR needs to handle words specific to local varieties of Aborigi-
nal English, e.g.,‘we chuck in like “dardy”’[M30] (‘dardy’ is a
Nyungar word meaning good, good-looking or cool, and is used
in Nyungar Aboriginal English [19]). They warned technologists
not to flatten Aboriginal identities, cautioning‘not all Aboriginal
people in Australia speak or sound the same’[F25], and‘it’s not
just one accent, there’s like. . . hundreds of different Aboriginal
groups’[F21]. They included specific examples such as‘Nyun-
gars have like a certain way of speaking and then when you go
up North they have a different accent up there as well. ’[F25].
Participants also mentioned the need for inclusive processes, e.g.
‘Go and visit all the language groups, and [...] have mob actually
doing it’[M51].
1We report direct quotes from participants using ids which combine
gender and age.
2870
Finding 3: Speakers of Australian Aboriginal English asso-
ciate ASR performance with race.Another recurrent theme
was that ASR-powered technology does not work well for In-
digenous people in Australia. Participants frequently said that
the technology worked better for white people‘because it’s al-
ready catered for them and used to their language’[F25]. Some
participants thought the technology worked best for specific
groups of white people, e.g.,‘educated white people’[F43] or
‘posh sounding’[F20]. Participants who did not abandon using
ASR-powered technologies frequently reported changing how
they speak in order to use the technology successfully. Many
participants described this in terms of sounding white:‘I have
to talk proper white ways... I have to change the way I speak so
it understands me. ’[F45],‘So, I try to talk it white way, instead
of blackfella2 way, and then they’ll understand. ’[M46],‘have
to really talk very clear ... and try and put on my best, educated,
white person voice’[F43]. F25 described the labour of having
to change how she speaks:‘it’s exhausting sometimes to always
keep code-switching an’ acting in quotation marks like profes-
sional white or proper. Cos you just wanna like relax when you
come home, I guess, and be yourself. ’
5. Discussion
This paper contributes to the understanding of how Indigenous
communities directly connect technology failures to lack of inclu-
sion for their languages and cultures, and associate technology
use with white ways of speaking and being [5, 7]. Rather than in-
terpreting these failures as isolated technical shortcomings, these
should be understood as symptoms of broader structural inequal-
ities in digital systems. In some cases these failures reinforced
negative self-images around intelligence and proficiency that
are strongly associated with colonial domination. Our findings
show that code-switching to mainstream Englishes in order to
use technology [4, 8] impacts speakers of indigenised varieties
of English, reproducing colonial relationships of domination and
stigmatisation of Indigenous ways of being. The requirement
to shift into standardised forms of English in digital contexts
imposes an additional cognitive, emotional, and social burden
on speakers, reinforcing the idea that their everyday linguistic
practices are incompatible with modern technological environ-
ments. In this way, digital platforms become sites where colonial
hierarchies are normalised.
The pride that Aboriginal English speakers feel for their lan-
guage variety is undermined by technology’s failure to support
its use. When language technologies such as voice recognition,
autocorrect, or predictive text fail to recognise Aboriginal En-
glish, they not only disrupt communication but also invalidate
linguistic identities. These repeated moments of misrecognition
do not exist in isolation. They reinforce the systematic exclusion
of Indigenous people at school, in hospitals, and within the legal
system. Taken together, and when also experienced in home
settings as we’ve shown here, these contribute to a cumulative
experience of marginalisation and harm.
We also found further evidence of the stressful labour that
minoritised communities must perform to use voice technolo-
gies, by changing how they speak [7, 39]. Our finding of pres-
sure on Indigenous people to switch to a ‘white voice’ when
using technology echoes findings from the education and health-
care domains regarding interactions with non-Indigenous people
[40, 41, 42]. V oice-powered technologies are increasingly be-
ing deployed on personal devices and in private homes, and
2‘Blackfella’ is Aboriginal English, meaning Aboriginal person.
our findings reveal significant increase in the pressure to speak
‘white way’ into these personal spaces. What is unique about
our findings is that these increasing pressures are in response
to a non-human agent (the technology) and, importantly, they
transcend institutional contexts. While Australian Aboriginal
English speakers have consistently been expected to modify
their speech in institutional settings (e.g., [43] describes a cross-
examination of three Aboriginal teenage boys in a Queensland
court where the defence counsel used lexical strategies to reframe
what the witnesses said using mainstream English), ours is the
first study to document these pressures on Aboriginal English
speakers in the home domain.
This research demonstrates ways in which calls for decolo-
nial methods in language technology [ 44, 45, 46, 47] can be
applied. We work closely with an advisory committee of Indige-
nous experts. We actively recruit Indigenous RAs and foster trust
to encourage autonomy regarding how to conduct interviews in
ways which make sense culturally and socially for them and their
participants. We involve these RAs in the interpretation and anal-
ysis of the data—not merely the data collection—by facilitating
culturally appropriate group discussion sessions. The interview
data demonstrates a level of trust that would not have been pos-
sible with non-Indigenous interviewers, illustrated by one whis-
pered comment from a participant regarding who technology
works better for:‘I don’t want to sound racist, but whitefellas’
[F20]. We not only call for ASR that is inclusive of Indigenous
ways of speaking, but also amplify calls for governance-centered
approaches to ASR development [29] which prioritise commu-
nity control over Indigenous speech datasets [48] and are mindful
of potential harms to Indigenous people [14].
6. Limitations
This research project is situated in Australia, where settler colo-
nialism has led to the loss of many ancestral Indigenous lan-
guages, and where Indigenous people continue to be minoritised.
Indigenous people have frequently been viewed as subjects of re-
search rather than partners in research, and we recognise that the
legacy of unethical and settler-colonial research has contributed
to distrust by many Indigenous communities [49]. These layers
of distrust of research may have affected who chose to take part
in the interviews. Since Aboriginal English is primarily an oral
language, without standardised orthography, the project utilised
the previous experiences of Collard and Rodríguez Louro in how
to best transcribe spoken Aboriginal English in written form.
7. Ethical considerations
We recognise that university environments can often be alien
or hostile for many Indigenous people in Australia. For this
reason, the interviews were conducted in other places, typically
private homes or public spaces. Transcripts were anonymised
and screened at University of Western Australia for culturally
or socially sensitive content befo