More than a feeling: Expressive style influences cortical speech tracking in
subjective cognitive decline
Matthew King-Hang Ma ID 1,∗∗, Yun Feng1,∗, Cloris Pui-Hang Li1,∗, Manson Cheuk-Man Fong ID 1,2
1 Research Centre for Language, Cognition, and Neuroscience, Department of Language Science
and Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2 Research Institute for Smart Ageing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
khmma@polyu.edu.hk, yunfeng@poly.edu.hk, ph2li@polyu.edu.hk, cmmfong@polyu.edu.hk
Abstract
Subjective cognitive decline (SCD) doubles dementia risk.
This study investigates how self-perceived cognitive worsening
shapes neural dynamics during naturalistic speech perception.
EEG was collected from 60 cognitively normal older adults
as they listened to speech varied in prosodic contexts, cate-
gorized by expressive style (scrambled, descriptive, dialogue,
exciting). Encoding models mapping three speech representa-
tions—acoustic, subsyllabic segmentation and phonotactic fea-
tures—to ongoing EEG signals were built. Cortical tracking
strength (CTS) showed that models fitted with subsyllabic lin-
guistic features outperformed acoustic ones. Crucially, greater
SCD severity was associated with weaker CTS of (1) subsyl-
labic linguistic but not acoustic features, and (2) prosodically
flat speech (scrambled and descriptive). Thus, the CTS of
higher-level linguistic features while listening to prosodically
flat speech may serve as a potential neural marker for early-
stage cognitive decline.
Index Terms: subjective cognitive decline, cortical tracking,
EEG, speech perception, speech prosody, phonotactics
1. Introduction
Population ageing worldwide leads to the increasing prevalence
of cognitive decline, resulting in a pressing need for effective
monitoring and early intervention strategies [1]. Subjective cog-
nitive decline (SCD), a self-perceived cognitive worsening de-
spite normal objective cognitive test performance, has emerged
as an early indicator of potential impairment [2]. Evidence sug-
gests SCD doubles the risk of progressing to mild cognitive im-
pairment (MCI) and dementia, particularly for those reporting
complaints at a younger age (around 60) [2]. While most studies
focused on memory decline [2], everyday functioning relies on
broader cognitive abilities. Exploring neural correlates of SCD
during ecologically valid tasks, such as naturalistic speech per-
ception, is therefore central to understanding cognitive decline
comprehensively and informing early detection strategies.
Effective speech comprehension is essential for older
adults’ social connection and quality of life [3], yet it often
declines with age. This stems from degrading auditory per-
ception and cognitive abilities, such as inhibitory control [4].
The degradation of auditory perception, beginning as early as
middle age [5], impairs both incoming phonological represen-
tations and the perception of speech prosody—–the vocal mod-
ulations of suprasegmental information—that is fundamental to
social interaction [6]. To compensate for degraded bottom-up
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
acoustic representations, speech comprehension relies increas-
ingly on cognitively demanding top-down processing. For ex-
ample, older adults rely more heavily on semantic rather than
acoustic cues during prosody perception [7].
Pioneering studies have discovered that ongoing neural sig-
nals, such as electroencephalography (EEG), can track incom-
ing auditory stimuli [8, 9]. Using encoding models like the mul-
tivariate temporal response function (mTRF), researchers have
shown that cortical tracking is not merely an epiphenomenon.
Instead, it facilitates general auditory processing [10, 11] along-
side speech-specific processing at the phoneme [12], word [13],
and prosodic levels [14, 15]. Furthermore, cortical tracking is
modulated by prior context [16] and intelligibility; for instance,
phoneme feature tracking is only significant when speech is un-
derstood [12]. These findings demonstrate cortical tracking’s
functional and predictive role in speech comprehension.
Cortical tracking studies in older adults show enhanced
tracking of higher-level linguistic features [13] and reduced
tracking of acoustic features [17], a pattern more pronounced
with poorer inhibition abilities [18]. These results suggest that
the tracking of linguistic features compensates for degraded
acoustic and cognitive functions. Furthermore, tracking of
the speech envelope provides unique contributions by aiding
in temporal prediction [14, 19], though this ability is shown
to decline with age [20]. While cortical tracking findings in
cognitively declined populations remain scarce and inconsis-
tent [11, 21], behavioral studies clearly show these popula-
tions exhibit significant impairments in recognizing emotional
prosody [22, 23]. Examining how the cortical tracking of di-
verse speech features changes in individuals with SCD across
varying prosodic contexts, could therefore reveal novel, early-
stage candidate neural markers for cognitive decline and pro-
vide insight into the underlying neural changes.
The present study utilizes cortical tracking to investigate
how self-perceived worsening of cognition affects speech per-
ception. We specifically tapped into features across two levels
of speech processing: acoustic and subsyllabic. While track-
ing of acoustic features reflects bottom-up sensory processing,
tracking of subsyllabic segmentation and phonotactic features
captures higher-level linguistic processing. Including both fea-
tures allows us to model the tracking of subsyllabic structures,
both independently and alongside their statistical predictions.
Furthermore, we evaluate the impact of varying prosodic con-
texts using custom stimuli categorized by expressive style.
We hypothesize that (1) cortical tracking strength (CTS) for
higher-level subsyllabic features will be significantly modulated
by SCD severity, whereas (2) CTS for bottom-up acoustic fea-
tures will remain relatively stable, reflecting a preservation of
sensory processing relative to higher-level linguistic process-
4801
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-527
Figure 1:Methodology.A.Three different set of stimulus features (Aco: Acoustic, Seg: Segmentation, Pho: Phonotactic);B.Training
and testing of mTRF models; and the derivation of cortical tracking strength.C.The grouping of 64 electrodes into 6 sites.
ing. Regarding the impact of prosodic contexts, we hypothesize
that (3) CTS for prosodically rich stimuli will be more sensitive
to SCD severity. While acoustic processing under clean speech
condition may be preserved, the need to integrate rapidly chang-
ing prosodic cues and multi talker dynamics imposes higher lis-
tening demands [24].
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Participants
A total of 62 (30F) Cantonese speakers with no known neuro-
logical disorders was recruited. These individuals were aged 60
– 70 (M= 65.2,SD= 3.0). Each participant was cognitively
normal per MoCA-HK, adjusted for education years [25]. De-
gree of SCD was assessed using the 14-item Subjective Cog-
nitive Decline Scale (SCDS) [26]. SCDS scores ranged from
14 to 58 out of 60 (M= 34.6,SD= 11.3). Hearing thresh-
olds were measured by Pure-Tone Audiometry (PTA). Written
informed consent was obtained from all participants.
2.2. Stimuli and experimental procedures
Speech stimuli of four expressive styles were constructed:
scrambled, descriptive, dialogue, and exciting. The scram-
bled and descriptive style stimuli were synthesized withAma-
zon Pollyfrom transcribed radio weather reports; the descrip-
tive style used the original text, while the scrambled style used
a word-level scrambled version. Dialogue-style stimuli were
sourced from a local community radio program, and exciting-
style stimuli were curated from a radio drama. While the scram-
bled and descriptive styles consist of single-talker speech, the
dialogue and exciting styles include two or more talkers. In-
cluding multi-talker scenario was a methodological choice to
enhance ecological validity, as well as to create cognitively
challenging conditions that demand both sensory and cognitive
resources. These complex scenarios open up the potential to
reveal subtle SCD-induced neural changes, which could other-
wise be masked while listening to simple, single-talker speech.
From an initial set of eight stimuli per style, we recruited
an independent group of 24 (12F) raters (age= 22.0±2.8)
to evaluate the perceived valence, arousal, and dominance of
these recordings. Then, we conducted K-means clustering (k=
4) on the 3D Valence-Arousal-Dominance (V AD) space. For
each style, we selected four out of eight stimuli that were closest
to their respective cluster center for the subsequent EEG study
(average ratings in Table 1). The standard deviation (SD) of
the fundamental frequency (F0) and root-mean-square (RMS)
amplitude of selected stimuli were also computed. As shown in
Table 1, the dialogue and exciting styles exhibited higher F0 or
intensity SD, revealing their richer prosodic nature.
Table 1:Mean stimulus ratings and acoustic properties. Val:
Valence; Aro: Arousal; Dom: Dominance. F0 SD: SD of F0 in
Hz. RMSSD: SD of RMS amplitude.
Style Val Aro Dom F0 SD RMSSD
scrambled 2.00 1.69 2.41 48.53 5.40
descriptive 2.57 1.94 2.69 46.75 5.42
dialogue 3.61 3.31 3.10 67.34 5.31
exciting 3.60 3.84 3.38 81.67 6.12
2.3. Data acquisition and preprocessing
EEG data were recorded using a 64-channel BioSemi Ac-
tiveTwo system at a 2048 Hz sampling rate. Eye movements
were monitored with horizontal and vertical electrooculograms.
Participants sat approximately 70 cm from a monitor while au-
ditory stimuli were presented via two speakers. During the
recording, they listened to 16 one-minute recordings of clean
speech (4 per expressive style) in a random order. After each
recording, they used a five-point Likert scale to rate perceived
valence, arousal, and dominance with the Self-Assessment
Manikin [27], as well as their overall enjoyment. Two partic-
ipants with unusually low variability in their behavioral ratings
(Z≤−1.96for standard deviation of valence, arousal, or dom-
inance) were excluded, leaving 60 (30F) participants.
Prior to any preprocessing steps, the raw EEG signals were
visually inspected to exclude channels contaminated by body
movements. The signals were first downsampled to 512 Hz and
average re-referenced. Independent component analysis (ICA)
was applied to remove eye artifacts following a z-score thresh-
olding approach [28]. Afterwards, channels that were excluded
during visual inspection were interpolated. The signals were
then band-pass filtered between 1 and 40 Hz using a third-order
Butterworth filter. The above steps were conducted with custom
Python scripts withMNE-Python[29].
2.4. Feature extraction
2.4.1. Acoustic features
The speech envelope and its onset were included as acoustic fea-
tures following existing studies [11, 12, 14, 16, 30]. To extract
the speech envelope, each audio signal was first downsampled
to 128 Hz, and then filtered with 24 gammatone filters ranging
4802
from 50 Hz to 8000 Hz. The filtered responses were then scaled
to the power of 0.6 to approximate the nonlinear relationship
between sound intensity and perceived loudness [30]. These
24 filtered signals were then averaged and filtered from 0.5 Hz
to 25 Hz to obtain the final envelope. The envelope onset was
computed as the first-order differences of the speech envelope.
2.4.2. Subsyllabic segmentation and phonotactic features
Subsyllabic segmentation was obtained by training a Cantonese
Montreal Forced Aligner (MFA) on the 109-hour Common
V oice Hong Kong Chinese Corpus (zh-HK 21.0), which fea-
tures 3,084 speakers [31]. A pronunciation dictionary was gen-
erated withCharsiuG2P[32] grapheme-to-phoneme conversion
tool. The resulting MFA alignments were then manually refined
in Praat [33]. Following standard Chinese phonological analy-
sis, the onset times of initials and finals rather than phonemes
were extracted as segmentation features [34].
To the best of our knowledge, there are no publicly available
Cantonese subsyllabic probabilistic phonotactic features. We
therefore extracted them by deriving the initial, final and tone
surprisal values from the Hong Kong Cantonese Corpus, which
contains around 230,000 words [35]. The texts were parsed with
pycantonese[36], and surprisal values were calculated as the
negative logarithm of the probability for each component: un-
igram probability for initialsP(initial), conditional probability
for finalsP(final|initial), and conditional probability for tones
P(tone|initial,final). All subsyllabic segmentation and phono-
tactic features were downsampled to 128 Hz. These features are
now available at [37] to facilitate future research.
2.5. Multivariate temporal response function (mTRF)
To investigate the cortical tracking of speech, we modeled the
relationship between the EEG signals (dependent variable,y)
and various stimulus features (predictor variables,x) using a
multivariate temporal response function (mTRF). It models the
EEG signals as a linear convolution of the stimulus features with
a kernelh(see also Figure 1B):
yt =
nX
i=0
τmaxX
τ=τ min
hi,τ xi,t−τ (1)
wherey t is the EEG signal at one channel at timet,nis the
total number of predictor variables, andx i is thei-th predictor.
We fitted all mTRF models using the Boosting algorithm im-
plemented in theEelbrainPython toolkit [38], which can yield
more accurate mTRF estimates than conventional ridge regres-
sion. Prior to fitting, the preprocessed EEG signals were down-
sampled to 128 Hz and low-pass filtered at 25 Hz to match the
sampling rate of the stimulus features. The mTRFs were esti-
mated over time lags ranging from -200 ms to 600 ms. To inves-
tigate the tracking of different stimulus features, we fitted three
models using distinct feature sets: acoustic (Aco), segmentation
(Seg), and phonotactic (Pho) features (Figure 1A). This proce-
dure was repeated for each of the four expressive styles, yield-
ing a total of 12 models.
Model performance was evaluated using a leave-one-out
cross-validation scheme. Withinkstimuli, a model was trained
on data fromk−1stimuli and then tested on the held-out stim-
ulus. This process was repeatedktimes, with each stimulus
serving as the test set once. CTS was quantified as the Pearson’s
correlation coefficient between the observed and predicted EEG
signals, averaged across allkfolds.
2.6. Statistical analyses
For statistical analysis, the 64 channels were grouped into 6
scalp sites (Figure 1C): prefrontal (FP); frontocentral (FC); cen-
troparietal (CP); parieto-occipital (PO); left temporal (LT) and
right temporal (RT) [28]. The maximum CTS per site served
as the dependent variable to capture the strongest local tracking
response while reducing dilution from weakly responsive elec-
trodes. To examine how CTS is modulated by SCD severity,
mTRF models and expressive styles, we fitted a linear mixed
effect model inRwithlme4[39] as in Equation 2:
CTS∼SCDS∗Site∗Model∗ExpressStyle+Age+Gender+
EducationYears+MoCA+PTA+Valence+
Arousal+Dominance+Enjoy+ (1|Participant)
(2)
where SCDS refers to the SCDS scores, Model refers to mTRF
models fitted with three distinct feature sets (Aco,Seg,Pho),
Site refers to the six scalp sites. Covariates included age, gen-
der, education years, MoCA-HK score, PTA, perceived valence,
arousal, dominance and enjoyment, along with the participant-
specific random intercepts. PTA was defined as the average of
the hearing thresholds at 500, 1000, 2000 and 4000 Hz [11].
The full model in Equation 2 was then reduced to a simpler
model with backward elimination. Type-III ANOV A was then
performed, and all post-hoc comparisons were conducted with
estimated marginal means usingemmeans[40].
3. Results
The final reduced model is shown in Equation 3.
CTS∼SCDS+Site+Model+ExpressStyle+Arousal+
SCDS:Site+SCDS:Model+Site:Model+
SCDS:ExpressStyle+Site:ExpressStyle+
ExpressStyle:Model+ (1|Participant)
(3)
As Equation 3 shows, none of the three-way or four-way inter-
actions survived after backward elimination. Among all signif-
icant factors, we were mostly interested in the Model main ef-
fect, the interaction between SCDS scores and expressive style
(F(3,4208.67) = 25.43, p < .001) and that between SCDS
scores and Model (F(2,4208.02) = 7.07, p < .001), address-
ing our three predictions. Other effects fall beyond our scope.
3.1. Subsyllabic models outperform the acoustic model
A significant main effect of mTRF models was found
(F(2,4208.02) = 21.48, p < .001). Post-hoc comparisons
(Figure 2A) revealed a hierarchy in model performance. The
Phomodel significantly outperformed theSegmodel, which
in turn demonstrated significantly higher CTS compared to the
Acomodel (ps < .001for all pairs).
3.2. SCD modulates CTS in linguistic (not acoustic) models
To decompose the significant two-way interaction between
SCDS scores and mTRF models, we first conducted a post-
hoc simple slope analysis and found SCDS scores significantly
modulated CTS negatively for theSegmodel (t(62.26) =
−2.05, p=.044) while the trend forPhomodel was marginally
significant (t(62.26) =−1.76, p=.084).
4803
Figure 2:A.CTS across models;B.SCDS×Model interaction.C.SCDS×ExpressStyle interaction. Y-axis: estimated marginal
means; ribbons: 95% CIs.
Subsequent pairwise comparisons were conducted with
Figure 2B showing the interaction plot. The trends of both
theSeg(t(4208) =−3.61, p=.001) andPho(t(4208) =
−2.70, p=.019) models were significantly more negative than
that of theAcomodel, while there were no significant differ-
ences betweenSegandPhomodels.
3.3. SCD modulates CTS in flat (not rich) styles
To decompose the significant two-way interaction between
SCDS scores and expressive style, we first conducted a post-hoc
simple slope analysis and found SCDS significantly modulated
CTS negatively for scrambled- (t(64.37) =−2.89, p=.005)
and descriptive-style speech (t(64.44) =−2.32, p=.023).
Subsequent pairwise comparisons were conducted with
Figure 2C showing the interaction plot. The trend for
scrambled-style was significantly more negative than that of
the dialogue- (t(4209.41) =−7.97, p < .001) and exciting-
style (t(4209.53) =−4.92, p < .001). Similarly, the trend for
descriptive-style was also significantly more negative than that
of the dialogue-style (t(4208.09) =−6.47, p < .001) and the
exciting-style (t(4208.12) =−3.41, p=.004).
4. Discussion
The present study investigated how CTS is modulated by SCD
severity, different mTRF models (trained by different acous-
tic or subsyllabic linguistic features), and expressive styles.
We first showed that the phonotactic model outperformed both
the segmentation and acoustic models in terms of CTS. Thus,
higher-level linguistic information better explained EEG signals
during speech perception in cognitively normal older adults.
Consistent with previous findings [13, 41], this confirms that
successful speech perception in aging relies more heavily on
top-down linguistic processing. Establishing this baseline sets
the stage to examine how SCD disrupts these processes.
Supporting our first two hypotheses, we found that SCD
modulates cortical tracking differently depending on the level
of speech processing. As predicted, greater SCD severity was
associated with weaker cortical tracking of higher-level, sub-
syllabic linguistic (segmentation and phonotactics) features, but
not acoustic features. It suggests that SCD may specifically af-
fect linguistic features, reflecting early vulnerability in process-
ing linguistic information that support speech perception.
We initially predicted that CTS for prosodically rich (di-
alogue and exciting), but not flat (scrambled and descriptive),
stimuli would be most negatively impacted by SCD severity.
This is due to the need to integrate rapidly changing pitch, inten-
sity, duration, and rhythm cues, as well as multi-talker dynam-
ics. High demands are placed on both the sensory and cognitive
systems in older listeners, whether they are cognitively healthy
or impaired [21]. Yet, our results showed the opposite pattern.
A possible explanation is that despite the local acoustic com-
plexity, rich prosody may be more beneficial than detrimental at
the SCD stage. Existing studies have shown that prosodic cues
may act as reliable acoustic and perceptual scaffolds in aiding
temporal predictions [19] and syntactic parsing [42]. Thus, our
results showed that, given the specific materials, the availabil-
ity of prosodic cues may allow even participants with greater
subjective concerns to compensate for weaker speech tracking.
In contrast, flat speech provides fewer prosodic cues, requiring
greater reliance on subsyllabic segmentation and phonotactic
probabilities. Together with the observed SCD-related reduc-
tion in the tracking of linguistic features, our findings there-
fore suggest that higher-level linguistic processing, when un-
supported by prosodic scaffolding, is most vulnerable to SCD.
Our study is limited in that only two levels of speech pro-
cessing were modeled. Future studies should examine features
including but not limited to word-level (e.g., word surprisal
[43]) and explicit prosodic-level (e.g., pitch contour [44]) fea-
tures to gain a more comprehensive understanding of declining
linguistic processing abilities and to test our speculated scaf-
folding role of prosody. Additionally, leveraging the EEG os-
cillatory hierarchy [10] could help localize specific linguistic
deficits and corresponding brain rhythms.
5. Conclusion
Utilizing speech stimuli across varying prosodic contexts, we
investigated how subjective cognitive decline (SCD) impacts
the cortical tracking of acoustic, subsyllabic segmentation and
phonotactic features. We found that greater subjective cogni-
tive concern is associated with weaker cortical tracking of (1)
higher-level, subsyllabic linguistic features, and (2) prosodi-
cally flat speech. These results suggest that individuals with
greater subjective cognitive concerns may make use of rich
prosodic cues to compensate for their diminished higher-level
linguistic processing. Consequently, the cortical tracking of
prosodically flat speech could serve as a candidate neural
marker for early-stage cognitive decline.
4804
6. Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the HKRGC Postdoctoral Fellow-
ship Scheme awarded to M.K-H.M.. We thank the University
Research Facility for Big Data Analytics (UBDA), HKPolyU,
for making the GPU virtual machines available for the compu-
tations involved.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Gemini 3.1 Pro was used to improve the grammar and syntax
after the author had written the draft. All AI-generated sugges-
tions were manually reviewed.