Multi-Talker ASR Unaffected by Speaker Change Count
Naoki Makishima, Suzuka Yamada, Taiga Yamane, Mana Ihori, Tanaka Tomohiro, Satoshi Suzuki,
Shota Orihashi, Ryo Masumura
NTT, Inc., Japan
naoki.makishima@ntt.com
Abstract
We develop an autoregressive model for multi-talker automatic
speech recognition (ASR) robust to the number of speaker
changes. Recent studies on multi-talker ASR handle multi-
ple speakers by recursively estimating a single token sequence
formed by concatenating their transcripts with speaker change
tokens. However, as this technique heavily relies on context in-
cluding speaker change tokens, inference performance degrades
when the number of speaker changes exceeds those in the train-
ing data. To address this limitation, we estimate the token se-
quence, including speaker change tokens, without relying on
how many speaker changes have occurred. This is achieved by
introducing a novel speaker change token mask in self-attention,
which sets the values of speaker change tokens and randomly
selected tokens referenced by other queries to zero, preventing
the model from inferring the number of speaker changes from
context. Experiments demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed
method.
Index Terms: multi-talker speech recognition, speaker change
detection, speaker diarization
1. Introduction
Due to advances in deep learning, the performance of automatic
speech recognition (ASR) has dramatically improved, enabling
recent ASR systems to handle long-form speech inputs such as
meeting conversations [1–5]. Such speech typically involves
multiple speakers taking turns to speak. Thus, speaker change
detection (SCD) is an important technique for multi-talker ASR.
Although SCD has been developed independently from
ASR [6–9], recent studies have increasingly focused on their
joint modeling [10–18]. The key idea in most of these stud-
ies is to recursively estimate a single token sequence formed by
concatenating the transcripts of multiple speakers with speaker
change tokens. For example, in [12], a speaker change token
is inserted into the Transformer Transducer [19] output vocab-
ulary so that the model explicitly emits a token whenever a
speaker change is detected. In [18], quantized timestamp to-
kens [20, 21] and speaker tokens representing the vocal charac-
teristics of the speech are added to the vocabulary, which are
estimated, along with the transcription, on a per-speaker basis.
This enables the model to handle speaker change in the same
way as ASR, utilizing the previously generated tokens.
However, a limitation of these conventional methods is that
the number of speaker changes the model can handle during in-
ference is influenced by the number of speaker changes present
in the training data; e.g., when the model is trained using audio
samples with up to 3 speaker changes, the performance of the
model degrades when the input audio has more than 3 speaker
changes, which is experimentally shown in Section 4.4. The
number of speaker changes to include in the training data de-
pends on the expected length and type of speech for the sys-
tem, and creating the training data each time can be costly. To
mitigate this limitation, conventional methods often control the
speech length and the number of speaker changes by segment-
ing the input audio [1–5, 20]. However, segmenting audio into
too short clips causes discontinuities and loss of semantic mean-
ing, which degrades performance [17]. Furthermore, even short
audio clips can contain frequent speaker changes, especially
given the prevalence of brief responses. In [22–24], transcrip-
tions are generated on a per-speaker basis; i.e., the number of
speaker change tokens is the same as the number of speakers
in the audio. Although this enables the model to handle au-
dio with an arbitrary number of speaker changes, transcriptions
of each speaker must be concatenated, skipping their chrono-
logical order, which is unsuitable for analyzing chronological
conversation structures and interactions.
To address this limitation, we propose a speaker change
token-masked autoregressive model for multi-talker ASR that
is robust to the number of speaker changes. The model esti-
mates token sequences, including speaker change tokens, with-
out relying on the number of speaker changes. This is achieved
by introducing the novel speaker change token mask to re-
place the conventional look-ahead mask [25] in Transformer
decoders. This mask is applied to treat the value of speaker
change tokens referenced by other queries as zero, as shown in
Fig. 1 (b). This prevents the model from estimating the num-
ber of speaker changes based on the number of speaker change
tokens. Moreover, to prevent the model from estimating the
number of speaker changes based on textual context, the mask
also treats the value of randomly selected tokens referenced
by other queries as zero in training, as shown in Fig. 1 (c).
These masking techniques make the model robust to the num-
ber of speaker changes, enabling multi-talker ASR of speech
with more speaker changes than those present in training. We
apply the proposed method to two types of multi-talker ASR.
The first one is multi-talker ASR with speaker change tokens;
transcriptions of multiple speakers are estimated by concate-
nating them with speaker change tokens [12, 26–28]. Further-
more, to investigate how speaker change token type and count
affect the proposed method, we apply the proposed method to
the joint modeling of multi-talker ASR and the speaker diariza-
tion in [18]. This method includes quantized timestamp tokens
and speaker tokens as well as transcriptions to estimate who
spoke when and what; these tokens also determine the number
of speaker changes, as well as speaker change tokens. Experi-
ments demonstrate that, while the conventional method suffers
a significant performance drop on speech that is composed of
more speaker changes than those present in training, the pro-
posed method alleviates this problem and outperforms the con-
6083
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1582
Transformer
Encoder
[sos] thanks [st] no problem [st] you too
Masks used for self-attention in decoder during training
Input single-channel audio Outputs (shifted right)
Transformer
Decoder
Masked Multi-head
Attention
Encoder-decoder
Attention
N x
Linear 
thanks [st] no problem [st] you too [eos]
Figure 1:Self-attention mask used in decoder. (a) Conventional look-ahead mask. (b) Proposed self-attention mask: speaker change
tokens are masked. (c) Proposed self-attention mask: speaker change tokens and randomly selected textual tokens are masked. Black
dots indicate tokens for which self-attention are calculated.
ventional methods for both types of multi-talker ASR models.
2. Conventional method
2.1. Multi-talker ASR with speaker change token
We denote the acoustic feature of the input speech asX=
(x1,...,x T ), wherex t ∈R F denotes thetth frame of the
feature,Fdenotes its dimension, andTdenotes its length.
We denote utterance-level textual tokens of multiple speak-
ers asw 1:M = (w 1,...,w M), whereMdenotes the num-
ber of utterance segments in the overlapped speech,w m =
(wm
1 ,...,w m
N m)denotes themth utterance’s textual tokens,
N m denotes the token length,w m
n ∈Vdenotes thenth tex-
tual token of themth utterance, andVdenotes the vocabulary
set. In [12,26], speaker change token[st]is used to concatenate
w1:M . The concatenated labels∈(V∪O)is given as
s= ([sos],w 1
1,...,w 1
N 1,[st],w 2
1,...,w 2
N 2,[st],
...,w M−1
N M−1,[st],w M
1 ,...,w M
N M,[eos]),(1)
where[sos]and[eos]denote the start and end of a sentence,
respectively, andO={[sos],[st],[eos]}. Multi-talker ASR
estimates the generation probability ofsgivenXas follows:
P(s|X) =
|s|Y
i=1
P(s i|s1:i−1,X),(2)
wheres i denotes theith token ofs,s 1:i−1 = (s 1,...,s i−1),
and|s|denotes the length ofs.
2.2. Joint modeling of multi-talker ASR and speaker di-
arization
Recently, several studies have tackled the joint modeling of
multi-talker ASR and speaker diarization. In [18], SOMSRED-
SVC was proposed, which jointly estimates multiple transcrip-
tions, timestamps, and speaker tokens. The speaker tokens are
denoted asd 1:M = (d1,...,d M), whered m∈Ddenotes the
mth utterance’s speaker tokens andDdenotes the speaker token
sets. The concatenated label sequence ¯s∈(V∪O∪T∪D)to
be estimated is denoted as
¯s= ([sos],[t 1
s],[t 1
e],w 1
1,...,w 1
N 1,d 1,
...,[t M
s ],[t M
e ],w M
1 ,...,w M
N M,d M,[eos]),(3)
whereTdenotes the quantized time token label set,[t m
s ]∈T
and[t m
e ]∈Tdenote themth utterance’s start time token and
end time token, respectively. Note that, compared to labels
in (1), ¯sincludes more tokens that determine the number of
speaker changes, namely timestamp and speaker tokens. The
generation probability of ¯sis recursively estimated in the same
way as in (2). In SOMSRED-SVC, the intermediate feature
is utilized as speaker embeddings for speaker diarization. For
details, please refer to [18].
3. Proposed method
3.1. Strategy
As discussed in Section 1, the conventional method degrades
ASR performance when speech contains more speaker changes
than seen during training, as shown in Section 4.4. To address
this problem, we propose an autoregressive model with a novel
speaker change token mask.
Figure 1 compares the decoder self-attention mask of the
conventional method and the proposed method. In decoder self-
attention, a mask is used to control which positions a token is
allowed to attend to. Positions that should not be attended to are
assigned a very large negative value so that those positions re-
ceive a weight of zero when applying softmax. In conventional
Transformer decoders, the look-ahead mask prevents each to-
ken from attending to future tokens. In the proposed method,
the self-attention mask not only prevents each token from at-
tending to future tokens, but also prevents the model from at-
tending to speaker change tokens, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Note
that, for simplicity, Fig. 1 only shows the case when[st]is the
only token indicating the number of speaker changes. When ¯s
in (3) is the label, timestamp token setTand speaker token set
Dare masked. In addition, the proposed self-attention mask
randomly masks the other textual tokens with the probability of
r, as shown in Fig. 1 (c). We assume that this prevents the model
from learning the number of utterances based on the context, as
is discussed in Section 4.4. During inference, we only mask the
speaker change token and do not mask the textual tokens even
when they are masked in training.
3.2. Formulation
We denote the target sequence label as ˜s, where ˜s=s
when the proposed method is applied to the multi-talker ASR
with speaker change token, and ˜s= ¯swhen it is applied to
SOMSRED-SVC. The proposed method estimates the genera-
tion probability of ˜sgivenXas follows:
P( ˜s|X) =
|˜s|Y
i=1
P(˜si|context,X),(4)
P(˜si|context,X) =
(
P(˜si|˜c1:i−1,˜si−1,X)if˜s i−1∈Q
P( ˜si|˜c1:i−1,X)otherwise ,
(5)
6084
where˜si denotes theith token of ˜s,Q= ({[st]}∪T ∪D)
is a set of always-masked tokens, and ˜c1:i−1 denotes the token
sequence that excludes all the elements inQfrom ˜s1:i−1. Com-
pared to Eq. (2), the model estimates the same token sequence
including speaker change tokens without using the context of
speaker change tokens, except when it is the token one step
earlier. This modeling is achieved by using the novel speaker
change token mask, as
H= TransformerEnc(X),(6)
gi = DecoderSelfAttentionMask(˜s1:i−1,r),(7)
ei = TransformerDec(H,g i, ˜s1:i−1),(8)
P(˜si|context,X) = Softmax(e i),(9)
where ˜s1:i−1 = (˜s1,...,˜s i−1),ris the masking probability of
textual tokens,TransformerEnc(·)is a Transformer encoder,
DecoderSelfAttentionMask(·)is the function that creates the
proposed self-attention mask,TransformerDec(·)is a Trans-
former decoder, andSoftmax(·)denotes a linear layer with
softmax activation. Each element of maskg i is defined as fol-
lows:
gij =



−∞ifj >i
−∞ifj <i,˜s j∈Q
−∞ifj <i,˜s j /∈Q, ξj <r,(training only)
0otherwise
,
(10)
whereg ij denotes thejth entry ofg i, andξ j ∼ U(0,1)are
uniform random variables of thejth serialized token. Note that
−∞stands for a large negative value used to assign a weight of
zero to the specific positions when calculating attention scores,
while0represents no operation. The first condition stands for
the standard look-ahead mask, the second condition determin-
istically masks tokens inQ, and the third condition randomly
masks the textual tokens with probabilityr.
We apply the proposed method to the multi-talker ASR with
speaker change token and SOMSRED-SVC. In the former case,
sin (1) is the target label, and the model is optimized with the
cross-entropy function. In the latter case, ¯sin (3) is the target
label, and we follow the loss function defined in [18].
4. Experiments
4.1. Dataset
We used the Corpus of Spontaneous Japanese (CSJ) [29] for
our experiments. First, we divided CSJ into training, validation,
and test data: 1,388 speakers for the training data (522 h), ten
speakers for the validation data (1.3 h), and ten speakers for the
test data (1.9 h). Since CSJ is a single-utterance dataset, we
created pseudo multiple utterance audio by mixing or concate-
nating these utterances. When mixing the audio signals, each
speaker was assigned one utterance, and the original volume
of each utterance was kept unchanged, resulting in an average
signal-to-interference ratio of about 0 dB. Delay values for each
utterance were randomly chosen under the constraints provided
in [22]. The start times of individual utterances differed by 0.5
s or longer so that every utterance in each mixed audio sample
had at least one speaker-overlap region. When concatenating
the audio signals to create non-overlapped speech, the original
volume of each utterance was also kept unchanged. The pause
between utterances was randomly chosen between 0.1 s and 0.5
s. We set the speaker of the consecutive two utterances to be
different. For model training and inference, we created two- to
three-utterance-overlapped mixtures and two- to six- utterance-
non-overlapped speech. The training data of multi-talker ASR
with speaker change token and SOMSRED-SVC are the same.
We utilized 80 log mel-scale filterbank coefficients as acoustic
features, which were extracted using a 20-ms-long Hann win-
dow with a 10-ms-long shift. We used characters as textual to-
kens.
4.2. Implementation
We used a Transformer-based ASR model [25,30] in the exper-
iments. For the model of multi-talker ASR with speaker change
token, we stacked ten-layer Transformer encoder blocks, where
the number of heads in the multi-head attention was set to 4, the
dimensions of the output continuous representations were set to
512, and the dimensions of the inner output in the position-wise
feed-forward networks were set to 1,024. For the decoder lay-
ers, we stacked two-layer Transformer decoder blocks, where
the settings were the same as for the encoder blocks. For the
SOMSRED-SVC model, we stacked 14-layer Transformer en-
coder blocks and four-layer Transformer decoder blocks, where
the other settings were the same as multi-talker ASR with
speaker change token.
4.3. Settings
We compared the proposed method, which uses a novel decoder
self-attention mask, with the conventional baseline method,
which uses the conventional look-ahead mask. The comparison
was conducted in the context of multi-talker ASR with speaker
change token and SOMSRED-SVC. All models except the ora-
cle model were trained on data including single-utterance seg-
ments, two-to-three-utterance non-overlapping segments, and
two-to-three-utterance overlapping segments; i.e., the training
data includes up to two speaker changes To evaluate the perfor-
mance upper bound, we created an oracle model whose training
data included four-utterance non-overlapping segments that are
composed of three speaker changes. The model architectures
for the conventional method, the proposed method, and the ora-
cle were identical. The timestamp tokens and speaker tokens in
(3) are obtained following [18]. All models were optimized us-
ing the RAdam [31] algorithm with a mini-batch size of 32. We
set the learning rate to10−4. The training steps were stopped if
the loss on the validation set did not decrease for ten successive
epochs. We applied label smoothing with the smoothing weight
of 0.1 [32]. We used character error rate (CER) and speaker
change count accuracy (SCCA) to evaluate performance. When
we evaluated SOMSRED-SVC, we also added timestamp error
rate (TER) and equal error rate (EER) for evaluation follow-
ing [18]. TER was calculated as the sum of the missed speaker
time and false alarm time; i.e., it equals diarization error rate ex-
cluding the speaker error rate. EER was calculated to evaluate
the discriminability of speaker embeddings. When comparing
hypothesized boundaries to references, we utilized a tolerance
of±250ms. SCCA was calculated as the ratio of the number
of test samples for which each method correctly counted the
speaker change to the total number of test samples. When cal-
culating CER, we only evaluated textual tokens excludingO,
T, andD, while considering the order of utterances.
4.4. Results
Table 1 shows the evaluation results on multi-talker ASR with
speaker change token. We compared the conventional base-
6085
Table 1:Evaluation results on multi-talker ASR with speaker change token. SC denotes speaker change, and (Ov.) and (No-ov.) indicate
overlapped speech and non-overlapped speech, respectively.
Method
CER (%) SCCA (%)
0 SC 1 SC 2 SC 2 SC 3 SC 0 SC 1 SC 2 SC 2 SC 3 SC
(Ov.) (Ov.) (No-Ov.) (No-Ov.) (Ov.) (Ov.) (No-Ov.) (No-Ov.)
Baseline 5.8 9.0 14.4 6.1 13.5 99.8 96.4 90.0 99.7 59.5
Ours (r= 0) 5.7 9.5 14.1 6.4 9.6 99.9 96.0 87.8 99.1 76.4
Ours (r= 0.4) 5.4 9.1 13.7 5.5 7.2 99.7 95.7 88.9 99.4 86.7
Ours (r= 0.6) 5.2 8.7 14.8 5.6 5.9 99.6 96.0 86.9 98.4 96.3
Ours (r= 0.8) 6.2 10.3 14.8 6.9 7.8 99.8 95.5 86.3 97.7 91.7
Oracle 5.9 9.3 14.6 6.1 6.1 99.9 96.9 88.6 99.6 99.2
Table 2:CER and proportion of predicted number of speaker changes when input audio contains four speaker changes and five speaker
changes. Bold text shows SCCA (%) of each method.
# SC Method CER (%) proportion of predicted number of speaker changes (%)
0 1 2 3 4 5≥6
4 Baseline 22.1 0.0 0.2 18.5 56.522.52.0 0.3
Ours (r= 0.6) 6.9 0.0 0.2 0.6 10.388.10.8 0.0
5 Baseline 28.4 0.0 0.2 12.9 46.5 30.48.41.6
Ours (r= 0.6) 7.5 0.0 0.0 0.3 2.0 17.578.41.8
Table 3:Evaluation results on SOMSRED-SVC.
Method CER (%) TER (%) EER (%) SCCA (%)
2 SC 2 SC 3 SC 2 SC 2 SC 3 SC 2 SC 2 SC 3 SC 2 SC 2 SC 3 SC
(Ov.) (No-Ov.) (No-Ov.) (Ov.) (No-Ov.) (No-Ov.) (Ov.) (No-Ov.) (No-Ov.) (Ov.) (No-Ov.) (No-Ov.)
Baseline 14.1 5.9 12.2 3.2 3.8 14.8 13.8 10.6 12.6 92.4 99.6 60.1
Ours (r= 0.2) 13.1 5.6 8.2 4.1 4.2 13.3 14.5 9.6 12.2 92.1 99.8 78.4
Ours (r= 0.4) 13.8 5.7 6.9 4.1 4.9 11.6 14.4 10.3 12.7 91.4 99.7 88.0
Ours (r= 0.6) 12.8 5.8 8.5 3.2 4.1 13.0 15.1 11.5 17.2 91.9 99.8 79.2
Oracle 14.6 6.0 6.1 4.0 5.0 7.6 13.6 8.3 8.0 88.8 99.1 99.6
line to the proposed method with variousrvalues. Note that
utterances up to two speaker changes were used to train the
baseline and the proposed method, while utterances including
three speaker changes were used to train the oracle. We can see
that the CER and SCCA of the baseline rapidly degrade when
the input audio contains three speaker changes, which demon-
strates that the baseline cannot handle speech with more speaker
changes than those present in training. On the other hand, our
proposed method improves CER and SCCA on speech includ-
ing three speaker changes to a level comparable to the oracle
while achieving almost the same performance on speech in-
cluding up to two speaker changes as the baseline. Although
the proposed method improves performance compared to the
baseline whenr= 0, the best CER and SCCA are achieved
whenr= 0.6. We assume this is because the model learns
to estimate the number of speaker changes from context when
r= 0while the random mask prevents it whenr̸= 0. More-
over, while larger values ofryield greater effects, excessively
largervalue complicates model training and degrades CER and
SCCA. Table 2 shows CER and distribution of the predicted
number of speaker changes when the input audio includes four
and five speaker changes. We can see that the baseline tends
to skip one to two utterances, leading to higher CER. On the
other hand, the proposed method estimates the correct number
of speaker changes in most cases, with most errors being one-
utterance skips.
Table 3 shows the evaluation results on SOMSRED-SVC.
The proposed method improves CER and SCCA when the in-
put includes three speaker changes not covered by the train-
ing data. Although the proposed method masks timestamp and
speaker tokens, this causes almost no degradation in TER and
EER, which evaluate the accuracy of predicted timestamps and
speaker embeddings, respectively. Compared to the result in
Table 1, the proposed method achieves the best performance
whenr= 0.4, and the difference between oracle and others
when the input includes three speaker changes become larger.
We assume that this arises from differences in the number of
masked tokens; developing a method to get closer to the oracle
as the number of masked tokens increases is future work.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed an autoregressive modeling method
for multi-talker ASR that can handle more speaker changes than
present in training data. The conventional multi-talker ASR es-
timates the transcriptions of multiple speakers by using speaker
change tokens and concatenating their transcriptions. How-
ever, as demonstrated in Section 4.4, the conventional method
tends to skip speakers when the number of speaker changes ex-
ceeds that present in training, which results in degraded CER
and SCCA scores. To address this limitation, we introduce
a novel speaker change token mask. This mask enables the
model to treat the value of speaker change tokens and the value
of randomly selected tokens referenced by other queries as
zero, which prevents the model from estimating the number of
speaker changes based on speaker change tokens and context.
Experiments on the CSJ dataset demonstrate that while the per-
formance of the conventional method degrades when the input
speech contains more speaker changes than present in training,
the proposed method alleviates this problem and outperforms
the conventional method.
6086
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
No generative AI was used in this paper.