MAC-V AD: A Modality-Aligned Cross-Attentive Framework for Robust Voice
Activity Detection
Bruhanth Mallik ID , Chintan Tundia ID , Kumud Tripathi ID , Shreyas Nagoor ID , Pankaj Wasnik ID
Media Analysis, Sony Research India
{bruhanth.mallik, chintan.tundia, kumud.tripathi, shreyas.nagoor, pankaj.wasnik}
@sony.com
Abstract
Recent studies indicate that the accuracy of V oice Activity De-
tection (V AD), a crucial component in speech processing sys-
tems, can be enhanced by leveraging both audio and visual cues.
However, effectively fusing multimodal information across di-
verse content to achieve a highly accurate and robust V AD is
still a challenge. In this paper, we present an audio-visual
Modality-Aligned dual Cross-attention framework for V AD,
MAC-V AD. The proposed model uses an audio encoder opti-
mised to adaptively acquire spectral and temporal representa-
tions from raw audio. Whilst the visual encoder is designed
to predict speech onsets, utilising face and lip features, accu-
rately. The proposed model also employs knowledge distillation
from a teacher network to steadily guide the multimodal frame-
work in rigorous learning for the V AD task. Evaluations with
the MMV AD dataset prove MAC-V AD’s superior performance,
validating the effectiveness of modality-aligned cross-attention
and self-supervised distillation
Index Terms: V oice Activity Detection, Multimodal Learning,
Audio-Visual Fusion, Knowledge Distillation
1. Introduction
The overall performance of modern downstream audio and
speech applications is inherently dependent on accurate identi-
fication and classification of speech and non-speech segments
within audio streams, called voice activity detection (V AD),
fundamentally a critical component of every speech process-
ing pipeline. Conventionally, diverse audio features, such as
acoustic, spectral, signal energy, and other speech attributes,
have been extensively utilised in conjunction with deep neural
representation methods to develop V AD models [1]. Although
audio V AD models’ reliability is compromised in the presence
of noise, reverberation, and overlapping speech scenarios [2].
Advancements in deep learning’s hierarchical computation have
motivated researchers to extend its multilevel abstraction capa-
bilities to address the V AD problem, particularly by leveraging
multimodal inputs.
Effectively, multimodal representation learning aims to
mimic humans’ remarkable ability to jointly model informa-
tion from spoken language and the speaker’s facial expressions
during peer-to-peer conversations. Specifically, speech conveys
phonemic information, whereas speakers’ facial expressions
and lip movement patterns contribute to the necessary visual
depiction of phonemes in speech, thereby improving listening
intelligibility. Therefore, multimodal V AD models are expected
to offer a more comprehensive solution, in which one modality
can complement the shortcomings of the other, thereby yield-
ing more reliable performance across diverse real-world acous-
tic conditions. Yet, effectively fusing multimodal information
to achieve a highly accurate and robust V AD remains challeng-
ing due to the complexity of real-world audio-visual scenarios.
Early multimodal V AD systems leveraged simple audio-
visual fusion strategies. For example, [3] used microphone ar-
rays and lip-motion detection via Hidden Markov Models, com-
bining the modalities through late fusion to improve robust-
ness in noisy environments. [4] proposed a visual-only V AD
leveraging chaos-based lip motion measures to handle illumi-
nation variations using fractal trajectories in phase space. [5]
further explored visual-driven V AD via spatiotemporal Gabor
filters, capturing facial movement dynamics purely from video.
Deep learning was introduced in audio-visual fusion with archi-
tectures such as autoencoder-based fusion feeding into RNNs,
demonstrating improved detection in noisy, transient-heavy
conditions [6]. [7] proposed an end-to-end V AD using a
WaveNet audio encoder coupled with residual visual networks,
showing the promise of neural fusion but lacking explicit cross-
modal attention and distillation strategies [8].
To address the limitations of current multimodal V AD mod-
els, we propose MAC-V AD (Modality-Aligned Cross-Attentive
V AD), which incorporates a self-supervised knowledge dis-
tillation network. The model employs modality-specific en-
coders: a wavelet-based SincNet audio encoder captures de-
tailed time–frequency patterns, and a Transformer-based vi-
sual encoder extracts fine-grained facial cues. These unimodal
representations are aligned through a Dynamic Audio-Visual
Cross Attention (DA VCA) module that facilitates context-aware
co-occurrence fusion across modalities. Additionally, we dis-
till knowledge from a larger pre-trained audio teacher model
(Wav2Vec 2.0 [9]) into the audio branch of MAC-V AD, thereby
reinforcing its role as a robust encoder and enhancing its gen-
eralization in noisy and low-resource settings. To enable rigor-
ous evaluation, we further adapt the challenging A V A-Speech
dataset into a refined benchmark tailored for multimodal voice
activity detection.
2. Methodology
The proposed MAC-V AD architecture, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 1, is a unified multimodal framework designed to assimi-
late the complex relationship between audio and visual modali-
ties for robust V AD. It comprises modality-specific encoders for
audio and visual feature representations, a dual cross-attention
fusion block equipped with a gating mechanism (refer Figure
2), and a back-end network that processes the fused latent em-
beddings to classify into speech or non-speech segments. Ad-
ditionally, a larger pre-trained audio teacher model (Wav2Vec
2.0) is employed to distill knowledge, thereby enriching the au-
dio branch and further improving V AD performance.
1381
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-384
Figure 1:Block diagram of the proposed MAC-VAD model.
2.1. Audio Encoder
The audio branch of the proposed MAC-V AD employs a learn-
able wavelet band-pass filter-based encoder, called WavelNet
[10]. WavelNet uses wavelet transform-based spectral analysis
with a single learnable scaling factor that dilates or compresses
in the time domain for each kernel, determined by the mother
wavelet.
yi =x⋆ψ i = 1√ai
l−1X
k=0
x[k]ψ
k−n
ai

(1)
where,⋆denotes the convolution operation;xis the input sig-
nal;ldenotes kernel length;a i defines the scale factor;y i
denotes the output;ψ i is the wavelet filter. Different mother
wavelets, which were closer to sinc function characteristics,
were examined from the Daubechies wavelet family (Db2, Db4,
and Db6) and the Symlet wavelet family (Sym2, Sym4, and
Sym6).
2.2. Vision Encoder
The visual branch of MAC-V AD extracts frame-level features
from face crops to capture lip movements and facial cues asso-
ciated with speech. While conventional 2D/3D CNNs are ef-
fective for local feature extraction, Vision Transformers (ViTs)
have demonstrated superior ability to model global context and
spatial relationships [11]. We adopt the EfficientViT model
[12], a lightweight and hardware-efficient transformer architec-
ture that provides a global receptive field and multi-scale fea-
ture learning. To enable the vision encoder to be more receptive
to plausible, diverse head and lip movements, the EfficientViT
model is pre-trained on the domain-specific CasiaWebface [13]
and CelebA [14] datasets. This design yields compact yet dis-
criminative per-frame feature vectors that effectively integrate
information across the entire facial region.
2.3. Temporal Modelling Networks
Frame-level features in isolation are insufficient to distinguish
speech from similar-sounding non-speech events. The non-
stationary speech characteristics and the dynamic motion pat-
terns corresponding to the speech content must be captured
using dedicated temporal networks for each modality. For
the audio modality, the WavelNet-encoded features are passed
through a Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM)
network [15], which aggregates information from both future
and past feature windows, allowing the model to capture intel-
ligence within the speech features. For the visual modality, the
features are processed by a Visual Temporal Network (VTN)
comprising multiple layers of rectified linear units (ReLU),
batch normalization (BN), and depth-wise separable convolu-
tion (DSConv), followed by a 1D convolution layer for dimen-
sionality reduction. Thus, VTN models the combined tempo-
Figure 2:Block diagram of the DAVCA fusion module. Here,
⊗,⊕and∥denotes Hadamard product, element-wise addition
and concatenation, respectively.
ral evolution of the speaker’s head pose, facial features, and
lip movements, distinguishing between static and dynamic ges-
tures. These modality-specific temporal networks enable the
MAC-V AD model to have more temporally aware representa-
tions.
2.4. Modality Aligned Cross-attentive Fusion Module
The proposed audio-visual fusion module for V AD is designed
to achieve well-aligned, complementary information corre-
spondence across the modalities, with resilience to collaps-
ing modality features due to noise, reverberation, occlusions,
poorer feature representations, etc. To dynamically align and
fuse latent audio-visual features, we propose a Dynamic Audio-
Visual Cross Attention (DA VCA) module, as shown in Figure
2. Initially, the two modality features, i.e.,F A andF V , are
projected into a latent bottleneck space of DA VCA. Here, they
are downsampled using a fully connected layer, FC Down, with
GELU activation to more effectively extract the intrinsic dis-
tribution across modalities. Then a symmetric cross-attention
facilitates inter-modal interaction betweenF A andF V , which
allows each modality to incorporate contextual insights from the
other and produce a well aligned cross-modal features,F′
A and
F′
V , as shown in equation (2).
F′
V =C Attn(FV,F A),F ′
A =C Attn(FA,F V )(2)
where C Attn(Q,K) =Softmax(QK T/√dk)K. However,
this cross-attention is insufficient in scenarios where either
modality is weak or collapsing. To prevent this, a dynamic gat-
ing mechanism is incorporated that controls the flow of rele-
vant and effective information via a weighted distribution, as in
equations (3), (4), and (5).
Gv =Softmax
 
F′
V/τ

,G a =Softmax
 
F′
A/τ

(3)
whereG a andG v are gating weights,τis the temperature pa-
rameter controlling softmax sharpness.
Fg
V =ReLU(G v⊙F V +G v⊙F′
V ) (4)
Fg
A =ReLU(G a⊙F A +G a⊙F′
A) (5)
where⊙denotes the Hadamard product. The dynamically gated
audio and visual features are up-sampled and combined with
the original audio and visual features, through a residual skip
connection to obtainF out
V andF out
A features. Finally, these fea-
tures, enriched with modality-aligned cross-modal contextual
cues, are concatenated to form the joint multimodal embedding,
FAV .Therefore, by modulating the interaction through dynamic
gating, the DA VCA module ensures that the final representation
is not merely a combination of signals but a modality-aligned
feature set in which the most relevant cues are preserved.
1382
2.5. Multi-Task Distillation and Training
The objective of knowledge distillation in the proposed MAC-
V AD model is to enhance the feature-learning capability of its
multimodal network without significantly increasing the overall
model size or complexity. As illustrated in Figure 1, the teacher
network consists of a frozen self-supervised Wav2Vec 2.0 [16],
a pre-trained model with richer semantic knowledge learnt from
a larger speech corpus. The teacher network processes the raw
audio through an adapter module, a feed-forward neural net-
work with a single hidden layer, to generate high-level con-
textual representations of speech activity in MAC-V AD, with-
out altering the original foundational weights of the pre-trained
Wav2Vec 2.0 model. The knowledge distillation head utilises
a distillation loss to effectively minimize the learning gap be-
tween the rich representations of Wav2Vec 2.0 and the proposed
multimodal V AD network’s projected features. Thus, encour-
aging the student multimodal V AD network to inherit robust
acoustic representations while leveraging visual cues to enhance
the model’s overall V AD accuracy.
2.6. Classification and Loss function
To obtain the final speech and non-speech predictions, the learnt
audio-visual representations from the proposed multimodal
framework are passed through a fully connected layer, which
produces a probability distribution over the binary classes via
the Softmax operation. The training objective uses a composite
loss,L total shown in equation (6), which combines the primary
task objective of voice activity detection with the distillation
and modality synchronisation objectives. The composite loss
components are defined as follows: the primary audio-visual
loss (LAV ) is a cross-entropy loss computed on the predictions
from the final fused representation, ensuring that the main out-
put is optimized for the V AD task. The features from the audio
and visual backends are utilised to obtain cross-entropy losses
LA andL V , respectively, ensuring that meaningful speech and
visual features are learnt.
Ltotal =L A V+αL A +βL V +γL distill +δL sync (6)
Ldistil =MSE(F,T)(7)
Lsync =MSE(W a2v,W v2a)(8)
whereα= 0.4,β= 0.4,γ= 0.4, andδ= 0.2are weights as-
signed to the individual losses, F represents the fused features,
T represents Wav2Vec 2.0 features,W a2v andW v2a repre-
sent audio-guided vision features and vision-guided audio fea-
tures, respectively. Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss is utilised
to align MAC-V AD’s learnt features with that of the pretrained
Wav2Vec 2.0 teacher model through a distillation loss,L distil,
as in equation (7), by the distillation head. Lastly, an auxiliary
audio-visual synchronization loss,L sync from equation (8), is
used to minimise the divergence between their attention distri-
butions in the DA VCA module, ensuring better learnability.
3. Experiments
3.1. Dataset Details
Currently, no large-scale, publicly available in-the-wild dataset
exists that is specifically curated for multimodal V AD. To over-
come this limitation, we utilise the A V A-Speech dataset [17]
to create the MMV AD dataset. A V A-Speech consists of 15-
minute continuous clips from 188 YouTube movies spanning
diverse languages and content. The dataset offers challeng-
ing real-world conditions, including background music, envi-
ronmental noise, overlapping speech, varied lighting, occlu-
sions, and diverse speaker poses, making it well-suited for ro-
bust multimodal evaluation. To obtain the MMV AD dataset, the
Clean Speech, Speech With Music, and Speech With Noise
segment labels are consolidated to a single Speech class, and
the No Speech label is assigned to the Non-Speech class. Then,
to refine the multimodal V AD dataset from the A V A dataset, the
audio clips are extracted using the speech annotations, and the
speaker’s face crops are extracted from the localised face and
temporal boundary annotations.
3.2. Implementation and Evaluation details
The proposed MAC-V AD model is implemented in PyTorch
with GPU acceleration, which extends the TalkNet architec-
ture [18] with key enhancements described in the methodology.
Model optimization uses AdamW with an initial learning rate of
10−4. Audio features are extracted from raw waveforms using
a wavelet-based audio network, while 112 × 112 face crops feed
an EfficientViT-based vision network to obtain visual features.
For the pre-trained teacher (Wav2Vec 2.0), raw audio is pro-
Table 1:Analysis of MAC-VAD’s Configurations
Model Acc(%) F1(%) Pre(%) Rec(%)
MAC-V AD Audio Unimodal
MFCC 76.83 47.32 59.18 36.45
SincNet 76.77 45.67 57.82 37.23
WavelNet 78.89 51.54 60.37 44.71
MAC-V AD Vision Unimodal
ResNet18 87.01 72.45 81.63 61.28
Eff-ViT 89.87 75.28 82.49 69.14
MAC-V AD
WavelNet+Eff-ViT 92.40 80.73 97.00 68.91
WavelNet+Eff-ViT+Distil 93.52 86.39 90.28 82.82
cessed directly without segmentation. The MAC-V AD model
has 21.4M parameters, yielding a GPU latency of 21.9 ms (45.7
FPS throughput) and a CPU latency of 107.4 ms per frame.
Evaluation employs standard classification metrics, emphasiz-
ing accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score, in %, to assess the
model’s speech detection performance.
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1. Analysis of MAC-V AD’s Configurations
Results presented in Table 1 demonstrate a significant perfor-
mance advantage of the proposed MAC-V AD approach over
unimodal frameworks for V AD. Among audio-only models,
WavelNet achieves the highest accuracy (78.89%) and F1
(51%), but overall audio performance remains modest, under-
scoring the difficulty of purely acoustic V AD in noisy settings.
Vision-only approaches are notably stronger, as Efficient ViT
achieves 89.87% accuracy and 75% F1, surpassing all audio
baselines and confirming the robustness of visual speech cues.
Integrating modalities provides the greatest gains. WavelNet +
EfficientViT achieved 92.40% accuracy and 80.73% F1 score.
Adding knowledge distillation from a pretrained Wav2Vec 2.0
teacher further improves performance to 93.52% accuracy and
86.39% F1, yielding the best results. These results demon-
strate that effectively fusing well-optimized audio and visual
encoder features with knowledge distillation yields richer au-
dio and speech representations, significantly enhancing V AD’s
robustness and precision compared to unimodal or non-distilled
models.
1383
Table 2:Comparative analysis of fusion methods on MAC-VAD.
Fusion Method Acc(%) F1(%) Pre(%) Rec(%)
Channel-wise Concatenation 92.10 83.08 87.79 78.84
Element-wise Addition 92.40 83.59 91.13 77.20
Compact Bilinear Pooling 92.90 84.90 89.56 78.68
Cross-Attention 93.11 85.41 91.75 79.89
DA VCA (Ours) 93.52 86.39 90.28 82.82
4.2. Effectiveness of Fusion Strategies
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed DA VCA module,
Table 2 compares various standard fusion approaches against
DA VCA on the MMV AD dataset. While standard methods such
as channel-wise concatenation and element-wise addition pro-
vide a basis for integrating modalities, they fail to model com-
plex inter-modal dependencies, resulting in inferior F1 Scores
of 83.08% and 83.59%, respectively. Compact bilinear pooling,
which captures higher-order cross-modal dependencies, im-
proves upon these baselines, achieving an F1 Score of 84.90%.
Cross-Attention, a popular mechanism utilised by multimodal
models like TalkNet, improves performance by aligning inter-
modal features, yet it remains vulnerable to modality collapse.
In contrast, the DA VCA module achieves the highest perfor-
mance (86.39% F1-score) by integrating a dynamic gating
mechanism that adaptively prioritizes the reliable representa-
tions across the modalities.
4.3. Impact of SSL Models on Knowledge Distillation
Table 3 examines how the choice of SSL teacher model affects
the performance of the optimum multimodal V AD configura-
tion. All four SSL teachers such as Wav2Vec 2.0, HuBERT
[19], xLSR [20], and WavLM [21] yield strong results, strength-
ening the contribution of distillation. The base version is con-
Table 3:Impact of SSL backbones on MAC-VAD performance.
Distillation Model Acc(%) F1(%) Pre(%) Rec(%)
MAC-V AD + xLSR 91.11 83.00 85.00 81.00
MAC-V AD + HuBERT 91.28 82.00 90.00 76.00
MAC-V AD + WavLM 91.44 83.00 89.00 77.00
MAC-V AD + Wav2Vec 2.0 93.52 86.39 90.28 82.82
sidered for Wav2Vec 2.0 and HuBERT. Among them, Wav2Vec
2.0 achieves the highest overall performance, with 93.52% ac-
curacy and an F1 score of 86.39%, as well as balanced preci-
sion (92%) and recall (81%). WavLM and xLSR closely follow,
both achieving 83% F1, but xLSR shows slightly higher recall
(81%), indicating stronger sensitivity to speech boundaries. Hu-
BERT trails slightly with 91.28% accuracy and 82% F1. These
findings highlight that while all SSL teachers enhance the mul-
timodal V AD framework, Wav2Vec 2.0 distillation delivers the
most consistent gains across metrics, likely due to its strong
representation of fine-grained acoustic cues. This ablation vali-
dates our selection of Wav2Vec 2.0 as the preferred teacher for
optimal multimodal V AD performance.
4.4. Analysis with Representative Speech Activity Models
Since there are limited established benchmarks and methods de-
signed for multimodal V AD, we utilise the MMV AD dataset
to compare the proposed MAC-V AD’s performance with other
representative audio-visual active speaker detection approaches
that aim to determine whether a person in the scene is speaking
or not. These methods address a closely related problem and
therefore provide a meaningful reference for evaluating the mul-
Table 4:Performance comparison of existing speech activity
models on the MMVAD validation set in terms of Accuracy, F1-
Score, Precision, Recall and AUROC.
Model Acc(%) F1(%) Pre(%) Rec(%) AUROC(%)
TS-TalkNet 90.53 80.00 86.00 73.00 94.70
ACLNet 90.57 79.40 87.00 72.00 95.39
LightASD 89.54 83.06 88.12 78.56 94.51
Pyannote 87.66 86.23 93.47 80.15 89.01
MAC-V AD (Ours) 93.52 86.39 90.28 82.82 97.85
timodal V AD task. In addition, we compare against the state-of-
the-art audio-only V AD model Pyannote [22] to contrast with
the multimodal approaches. These V AD performance com-
parisons are presented in Table 4. TS-TalkNet [23] leverages
speaker embeddings to complement audio-visual cues, achiev-
ing 90.53% accuracy and 80.00% F1-score. ACLNet [24] com-
bines facial cues with reference speech to achieve robust V AD
detection of 90.57% accuracy and 79.40% F1-score. LightASD
[25] adopts a low complexity multimodal design with split
2D/3D convolutions and GRUs, obtaining 89.54% accuracy and
83.06% F1-score. MAC-V AD outperforms all assessed multi-
modal techniques and the strong audio-only Pyannote [22], with
an accuracy of 93.52% and an F1-score of 86.39%. Evalua-
tions with the MMV AD dataset also demonstrates MAC-V AD
framework’s superior AUROC and F1-score, hence proving the
proposed model’s efficacy for the V AD tasks.
4.5. Robustness to Acoustic Noise
To evaluate robustness under noisy conditions, background-
noise samples are introduced from the MUSAN dataset [26]
into the MMV AD dataset. The noise is mixed with the orig-
inal audio at different signal-to-noise ratios (SNR). As shown
Table 5:Performance of MAC-VAD under different noise levels
Noise (SNR) Acc(%) F1(%) Pre(%) Rec(%)
0 dB 92.26 83.50 90.23 77.70
5 dB 92.37 83.56 87.11 80.28
10 dB 92.63 84.27 92.75 77.20
15 dB 92.49 84.21 95.74 72.83
in Table 5, MAC-V AD maintains a stable performance across
varying noise levels, demonstrating robustness to acoustic noise
and its ability to effectively leverage multimodal cues even in
degraded audio signal.
5. Conclusion
This work presents MAC-V AD, a multimodal audio-visual
voice activity detection framework that effectively integrates
advanced audio and vision encoders with knowledge distilla-
tion. Experimental results demonstrate that unimodal audio-
and vision-only models struggle in challenging conditions,
whereas the best outcomes are achieved when both modali-
ties are fused. The combination of WavelNet and Efficient
ViT with Wav2Vec 2.0 distillation achieves the highest accu-
racy of 93.52% and an F1 score of 86.39%, clearly surpassing
the unimodal and non-distilled counterparts. Furthermore, the
results demonstrate that MAC-V AD’s accuracy surpasses that
of the SOTA V AD model (Pyannote) and is robust to back-
ground noise. Thus, MAC-V AD offers a scalable solution for
real-world V AD, laying a strong foundation for future research
on multimodal speech processing in noisy and dynamic envi-
ronments.
1384
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used solely for language refinement,
grammar correction, and improving the overall clarity and read-
ability of the manuscript. These tools assisted in polishing and
structuring the text but w