Constrained CTC Decoding for Efficient Diacritic Restoration
Rufael Marew ID , Amr Keleg ID , Hanan Aldarmaki ID
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
{rufael.marew,amr.keleg,hanan.aldarmaki}@mbzuai.ac.ae
Abstract
In this work, we address diacritic restoration for Arabic speech
transcripts. Most speech data are undiacritized, limiting the
ability of modeling fine-grained phonological distinctions. The
speech modality has recently been explored as a way to comple-
ment text-based diacritic restoration efforts. We propose an ef-
ficient non-autoregressive approach for speech-to-text diacriti-
zation based on Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC).
Our method incorporates hard constraints during decoding by
constructing a character-level diacritization lattice from an un-
diacritized transcript and restricting hypotheses to valid dia-
critized realizations. We evaluate on Classical Arabic and Mod-
ern Standard Arabic test sets (namely, ArV oice and ClArTTS)
against a more computationally-complex multi-modal diacritic
restoration baseline, and show statistically significant reduc-
tions in diacritic error rates in both, demonstrating that the pro-
posed approach offers both performance and efficiency gains.1
Index Terms: speech recognition, diacritic restoration.
1. Introduction
The Arabic script is an abjad writing system with alphabetic
characters mainly representing consonants and long vowels, and
additional diacritical marks representing short vowels, gemina-
tion, nunation, or the absence of a vowel. However, diacritics
are typically dropped in text [1] and inferred from the surround-
ing context, making Arabic script under-specified for speech
applications. In downstream pipelines, such as text-to-speech
(TTS) and assistive reading interfaces, the absence of diacritics
can lead to systematic pronunciation errors and ambiguity, par-
ticularly for homographs and morphologically complex forms.
Additionally, automatic speech recognition (ASR) models are
typically unable to generate fully diacritized transcripts, given
the lack of large-scale fully diacritized data. Training data often
has mixed coverage: some corpora are fully diacritized, such
as Classical Arabic data (CA) or curated Modern Standard Ara-
bic (MSA) resources, whereas large ASR corpora and conversa-
tional speech transcripts are typically completely undiacritized
and, in less common cases, partially diacritized.
Diacritic restoration is the task of filling in missing diacrit-
ics, which has a long history of research and development as a
text-only task. In this setup, diacritic restoration is framed as
a sequence-labeling task, where the input is undiacritized text,
and the output is the corresponding diacritized text. One limi-
tation of this setup is that words can still be ambiguous in con-
text [3], as exemplified in Figure 1. Conversely, the presence
of the corresponding speech signal could make these ambigui-
ties recoverable from acoustic cues (e.g., vowel quality/length,
1You can access our codebase through:https://github.com/
rufaelfekadu/DiaCTC
Undiacritized Z@ðY¸@ I 	J.¸@ IK. Qå
Transliteration AldwA’ Albnt ˇsrbt
Diacritized (1) Z@ ð Y¸@ I	J.
¸@ IK. Qå
Transliteration (1) Al.dawaA’a Al.bin.tu ˇsaribat.
Gloss (1) the medicine the girl drank
Translation (1) The girl drank the medicine
Diacritized (2) Z@ ð Y¸@ I	J.
¸@ IK. Qå
Transliteration (2) Al.dawaA’a Al.bin.tu ˇsur˜ibat.
Gloss (2) the medicine the girl was made to drink
Translation (2) The girl was made to drink the medicine
Figure 1: An example of an ambiguous undiacritized sentence
with multiple possible diacritizations with English glosses and
transliterations (according to the HSB scheme [2]).
gemination, case endings in careful speech, and dialectal re-
alizations), suggesting that speech-conditioned diacritization
can outperform purely text-based restoration. Recent research
demonstrated that incorporating speech data provides a comple-
mentary signal that improves diacritic restoration as the vowel
information can be inferred from acoustic data [4, 5, 6]. These
works address speech-to-text diacritization: given an acoustic
input and an undiacritized text reference, the goal is to pre-
dict a fully diacritized transcript that is consistent with both the
speech signal and the given undiacritized reference. All these
prior methods propose combining an acoustic or ASR model
with a text-based decoder in a multi-modal learning framework.
This set-up ensures that the base undiacritized alphabetic char-
acters are unchanged, and only the diacritics are added to the
transcript in a constrained manner, whereas direct ASR systems
typically include character insertion, deletion, and substitution
errors. While these multi-modal approaches have shown po-
tential in Classical Arabic, their generalization to Modern Stan-
dard and Dialectal Arabic is still poor [7], and more research is
needed to generalize performance.
In this work, we propose a more efficient approach for
speech-based diacritic restoration, where we rely on ASR CTC
decoding mechanism to meet the required linguistic constraints
directly without the need for an additional text-based mod-
ule and multi-modal training. Our key idea is to construct
a character-level diacritization lattice from the undiacritized
transcript and restrict decoding hypotheses to paths that corre-
spond to valid diacritized outputs. This yields a partially forced-
aligned decoding graph: the model emits the reference alpha-
betic characters in their respective locations and only predicts
diacritics at expected diacritic locations. Unlike prior multi-
modal speech and text diacritization decoders, this design pre-
serves the simplicity and speed advantages of CTC decoding
799
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3220
and can be integrated as a drop-in decoding constraint on top
of a standard CTC-based ASR model. We demonstrate experi-
mentally that this approach results in more robust and general-
izable diacritic restoration performance across Classical Arabic
and Modern standard Arabic compared to the baseline, while
being more streamlined and efficient.
2. Background & Related Work
2.1. Arabic Diacritic Restoration
Arabic diacritization has been studied extensively, but primarily
as a text-based diacritic restoration problem, motivated by the
fact that short vowels and other phonological marks are com-
monly omitted in everyday Arabic writing despite their impor-
tance for disambiguation [8, 9]. It is framed as a sequence label-
ing task and trained using different types of classical and neural
architectures to predict diacritics corresponding to each input
alphabetic character. A recent line of work investigates diacrit-
ics in the context of speech recognition, either by training ASR
systems to emit diacritized text or by analyzing diacritic recog-
nition behavior under different supervision conditions [10, 11].
These studies report that diacritic recovery can be improved
when ASR is fine-tuned with manually diacritized transcripts
and propose evaluation views that separate diacritic recognition
quality from overall recognition accuracy [10]. Because fully
diacritized Arabic speech data are scarce, prior works explored
leveraging limited diacritized speech supervision in addition to
text-based augmentation strategies, or using strong pretrained
ASR models to bootstrap diacritized transcripts for subsequent
multi-modal restoration models [5, 6]. In [4], speech is utilized
indirectly by augmenting the undiacritized text input with dia-
critized ASR hypotheses. These works demonstrate that incor-
porating speech as a supporting input modality besides text in-
put can significantly improve diacritic restoration performance.
2.2. Constrained Decoding and Lattice-based Inference
Constrained decoding is a well-established idea in speech and
language processing, with weighted finite-state transducers
(WFSTs) providing a principled framework to encode pronun-
ciation lexicons, grammars, and decoding constraints efficiently
[12]. In neural generation, lexically constrained decoding meth-
ods (e.g., grid beam search) restrict outputs to satisfy required
constraints without changing model parameters [13]. Recent
works extend CTC to incorporate partial or flexible supervi-
sion by expanding the set of admissible alignments [14, 15, 16].
For instance, [17] applies wildcard CTC during decoding for
biasing and rare-word handling, using a wildcard-enabled scor-
ing/search procedure to promote desired terms without retrain-
ing the base model. Mask-CTC [18] initializes a hypothesis
using greedy CTC and then iteratively refines the sequence
by masking low-confidence tokens and predicting them con-
ditioned on the remaining context, combining CTC alignment
with a mask-prediction objective. Our method is complemen-
tary to these: instead of refining arbitrary tokens, we impose
a hard transcript skeleton (the undiacritized characters) and re-
strict inference to diacritic insertions at permitted positions.
3. Proposed Model
We address speech-to-text diacritization in a setting where we
are given the acoustic input utterance x and the undiacritized
character sequence u = c1 . . .cN as input. Our goal is to recover
the missing diacritics using the speech signal while keeping
Table 1: Description of datasets used in our experiments. CA
refers to Classical Arabic,MSA refers to Modern Standard Ara-
bic (MSA), and (*) refers to text-only data.
Variety Dataset Train Test Baselines Ours
Size Size §(4.3) §(4.4)
CA+MSA Tashkeela* [19] - - ✓
CA ClarTTS [20] 12h 0.3h ✓ ✓
MSA ArV oice 1,3 [21] 6h 0.9h ✓ ✓
Total 18h 1.2h 18h 18h
the base characters fixed , resulting in the diacritized character
sequence y = c1d1 . . .cNdN.
Label design. Each base character has at most one diacritic;
multi-diacritic combinations are merged into a single-character
token to preserve a 1-to-1 character-level representation. This
is equivalent to most text-based diacritic restoration methods,
formulated as a character-level sequence labeling task. In cases
where the ground-truth labeling contains no diacritics, it is a
common practice to use a special ‘no diacritic’ token. In our
method, we use the CTC blank token to denote the absence of
diacritics.
3.1. Acoustic Model and CTC Training
For training, we use available speech data with diacritized tran-
scripts. We train a CTC-based ASR model to predict the target
sequence of characters, which includes both alphabetical letters
and their respective diacritics. Given acoustic feature sequence
x, the neural encoder produces frame-level posteriors
pt (k| x), t = 1 . . .T ,k∈ V∪{ ε}, (1)
where V is the output vocabulary and ε is the CTC blank sym-
bol. Under CTC, the probability of a label sequence y is
P(y| x) = ∑
π∈B(y)
P(π| x), (2)
where π is a frame-level alignment path and B(·) is the set of
all valid paths π that map to y.
Training minimizes the negative log-likelihood:
LCTC =−logP(y⋆| x), (3)
with y⋆ the reference diacritized transcript.
3.2. Inference with Diacritization Constraint Lattice
In typical ASR inference, CTC decoding finds the most likely
label sequence, and the label vocabulary in each time step in-
cludes all output characters, implemented as a Weighted Finite-
State Transducer (WFST). The default CTC topology is pre-
sented in Figure 2a. In our application, we only need to predict
the diacritic sequence while keeping the reference alphabetic
sequence unchanged. To implement this contraint, we construct
a lattice Gchar(u), which is a linear-chain WFST whose state
track progress through the undiacritized transcript u, with ad-
ditional wildcard states inserted after each Arabic letter ui for
diacritic prediction. For instance, if the undiacritized transcript
is c1c2c3, the resulting pattern p with wildcard (‘.’) characters
will be ‘c1.c2.c3.’ .
800
0
1
3⟨b⟩:⟨ε⟩
C:C
⟨δ⟩:⟨δ⟩
C:⟨ε⟩
⟨b⟩:⟨ε⟩
⟨δ⟩:⟨δ⟩
⟨δ⟩:⟨ε⟩
⟨b⟩:⟨ε⟩
C:C
(a) Default CTC topology for diacritized Arabic
0 1 2 3 4 5
⟨b⟩:⟨ε⟩
A:A
A:⟨ε⟩
⟨b⟩:⟨ε⟩
⟨δ⟩:⟨δ⟩
⟨b⟩:⟨ε⟩
⟨δ⟩:⟨δ⟩
⟨δ⟩:⟨ε⟩
⟨b⟩:⟨ε⟩
B:B
⟨b⟩:⟨ε⟩
B:B
B:⟨ε⟩
(b) Diacritic Decoding topology for the pattern A.B
Figure 2: (a) Typical ASR CTC topology, where C represents the set of Arabic alphabetic characters, vs. (b) our proposed modified
topology for constrained diacritic decoding for the pattern ‘A.B’. δ represents the wildcard characters (diacritics + special tokens).
Let W⊆ V be the set of wildcard characters, which in our
model are the composite Arabic diacritic labels in addition to
the CTC blank symbol; the lattice is constructed as follows: for
each character in p,
• If p j is a wildcard, then add parallel arcs for each wildcard
characters in W
s j−1
δ− →s j, ∀δ∈ W. (4)
• Else, emit the character directly
s j−1
ci
− →s j. (5)
This lattice compactly represents all diacritized strings
compatible with u and can be implemented as a WFST-style ac-
ceptor. The resulting decoding graph can be seen at Figure 2b.
Operationally, this can be realized by composing a CTC de-
coding graph with Gchar(u), or by restricting beam expansions
to only those symbols permitted by outgoing arcs in the lattice
state corresponding to the current character position. Intuitively,
this is a partial forced-alignment formulation: the decoding
graph forces the base letters to appear in the output in the same
order as in u, and the model only predicts which diacritic (if
any) accompanies each letter.
4. Experimental Details
4.1. Datasets
Table 1 lists the datasets used to train and test the baseline
and proposed models. We use two datasets covering different
Arabic varieties to test the models’ generalization capabilities:
1. ClArTTS [20] provides carefully read single-speaker speech
in Classical Arabic based on a classical religious book, with
transcripts manually annotated with full diacritics.
2. ArVoice [21] contains multi-speaker read speech data from
the news domain in Modern Standard Arabic; we utilize the
fully diacritized portions (parts 1 and 3).
4.2. Data Preprocessing
We apply a lightweight normalization pipeline to standardize
the text and reduce inconsistencies. Crucially, we normalize the
character strings into the Normalization Form Canonical Com-
position (NFC) form, as defined by the Unicode Standard, to
unify the representation of the characters with multiple encod-
ings (e.g., “Alef with Hamza” as a single character “\U0623” or
multiple characters “\U0627\U0654”). This also standardizes
the order of consecutive diacritics to a canonical order. We ad-
ditionally collapse multiple consecutive whitespace characters
into a single space.
Table 2: Performance of the ASR model from [22] before and
after fine-tuning on the combined training splits of ClArTTs
and ArVoice. WER/CER are calculated using diacritized texts
(Diac) and undiacritized texts ( Undiac) to isolate diacritic er-
rors from base character errors. Reference Diacritic Coverage
(DCov): ArVoice=73.19, ClarTTS=79.13.
Model Test Set DCov Diac Undiac
(%) WER CER WER CER
w2v - zero shot ArV oice 50.55 88.58 24.21 44.02 10.40
ClArTTS 70.19 58.91 15.27 24.08 7.02
w2v - fine-tuned ArV oice 75.25 40.82 6.51 19.94 3.61
ClArTTS 79.12 17.17 3.17 10.03 2.46
4.3. Baselines
For baselines, we use the two models described in [4]:
Text-only Model: This model is composed of a two-layer
Transformer text encoder to process the input character se-
quence, and a linear classification head to predict a diacritic
label for each character position. This model is first trained on
the fully diacritized text transcripts of Tashkeela, which contain
a mixture of CA and MSA samples (but mostly CA), and is then
further fine-tuned on the target training split used in our experi-
ments. This baseline represents the standard text-based diacritic
restoration approach, where no speech data are used to infer the
missing diacritics.
Text+ASR Model: This model augments the text-only trans-
former with information derived from speech. A pre-trained
ASR model first produces a diacritized hypothesis from the in-
put speech utterance. The undiacritized transcript and the dia-
critized ASR hypothesis are then encoded by two separate but
identically configured transformer encoders. The two represen-
tations are then fused via cross-attention at the final layer: the
representations of the undiacritized transcript are used for the
query vectors, and the representations of the ASR hypothesis
are used for the key and value vectors. This yields fused repre-
sentations aligned to the length of the undiacritized transcript.
A linear classification head is then applied to the fused repre-
sentations to predict a diacritic label for each character position.
The model’s text encoder is first initialized from the Tashkeela-
based Text-only Model described above before fine-tuning the
full multi-modal diacritic restoration system.
801
Table 3: Cross-dataset results in terms of Word Error Rate (WER) and Dia-
critic Error Rate (DER) compared to baselines from [4]. DER includes “no
diacritic” and word endings.
Test Set→ ClArTTS ArV oice
Model Train Set↓ WER DER WER DER
Text Baseline
ClArTTS
33.94 11.7 80.05 39.97
Text +ASR Baseline 12.33 3.54 56.20 19.21
Ours 11.21 3.53 39.89 12.04
Text Baseline
ArV oice
72.43 30.03 62.19 21.05
Text +ASR Baseline 99.94 76.61 40.17 11.9
Ours 34.94 11.86 27.87 7.73
Text Baseline ClArTTS
+ ArV oice
31.82 11.87 55.86 16.43
Text +ASR Baseline 29.63 9.05 34.47 9.93
Ours 13.05 3.80 30.36 8.69
Figure 3: The bootstrap distribution of the differences
in DER between our method (proposed) and text+ASR
(baseline), trained on ClArTTS and ArVoice, with 95%
confidence intervals.
4.4. Experimental Settings
Evaluation Metrics: We report word-error-rate (WER) and
character-error-rate (CER) metrics for both ASR and diacritic
restoration models. We also report the Diacritic Coverage
Rate (DCov), which measures the pervasiveness of diacritics
in a system’s output. It is defined as the percentage of base
Arabic characters that are diacritized out of the total number
of base Arabic characters in a sentence. To assess diacritic
restoration performance, we report Diacritic Error Rate
(DER), measuring the fraction of characters for which the
predicted diacritic differs from the reference, under the strict
assumption that the base-character sequences in the reference
and hypothesis match (i.e., diacritics are compared at the same
character positions). we report the total DER including no
diacritic and including word ending diacritics2.
ASR Model: We use a Wav2vec2-XLSR [22] model originally
trained on Arabic speech from the Common V oice and Arabic
Speech Corpus. We fine-tune it using the relevant training cor-
pus for each experiment. We report the baseline ASR perfor-
mance in Table 2 using standard CTC decoding, before and
after fine-tuning it on the combined training set. Fine-tuning
improves both diacritics coverage and error rates.
Experiment’s Settings and Objectives: The ASR model used
in the baseline and ours are always identical in our experiments,
providing a fair basis for comparison. Note also that the base-
line has the advantage of incorporating additional data from the
text domain (i.e., the Tashkeela corpus), whereas our model can-
not utilize such data. Our model, however, is more compact and
streamlined as it directly utilizes the ASR model without the
need for additional text encoders.
Optimization: We fine-tune all models using AdamW opti-
mizer with a linear learning-rate schedule (warmup followed by
decay), using a peak learning rate of 3 e−4 and 1,500 warmup
steps. Training runs for 100 epochs with a batch size of 64 on
an NVIDIA A100 GPU (80GB VRAM).
5. Results and Discussion
Table 3 shows diacritic restoration results of our proposed
method compared to the baselines under matched, cross-dataset,
2In Arabic, word ending diacritics often denote grammatical rather
than morphological information. We do not make a distinction here.
and combined-training settings to thoroughly evaluate gener-
alization performance. First, comparing the Text-only and
Text+ASR baselines, our results conform with previous find-
ings from [4] that the speech modality significantly improves
diacritic restoration performance. In the matched ClArTTS set-
ting, the Text+ASR baseline and our method achieve nearly
identical DER. However, our method shows stronger robustness
under dataset mismatch. When trained on ClArTTS and evalu-
ated on ArV oice or vice versa, the Text+ASR baseline degrades
sharply, whereas our method shows better robustness and gen-
eralization. This suggests that relying only on the final ASR
hypothesis can lead to poor cross-dataset generalization, while
using richer information from the CTC decoding graph yields
more consistent performance.
The combined-training setting further supports this trend.
When trained on both ClArTTS and ArV oice, our method
achieves the best performance on both test sets. To verify
the statistical validity of this improvement, we applied non-
parametric bootstrap resampling to report confidence intervals.
Specifically, we generated 2,000 bootstrap samples with re-
placement, and we computed the performance difference be-
tween our proposed method and the Text+ASR baseline in the
combined-training setting. The empirical distribution of these
differences was used to estimate the 95% confidence intervals,
which are plotted in Figure 3. In this figure, negative values in-
dicate that the proposed method achieves lower DER compared
to the baseline for a specific boostrap sample. Note that for
both datasets, the confidence intervals lie entirely below zero,
indicating that the improvement in DER is significant.
6. Conclusion
We described a constrained CTC decoding method for Arabic
diacritic restoration and demonstrated its effectiveness against
comparable baselines. The approach results in better perfor-
mance and better generalization across two datasets of Modern
Standard and Classical Arabic, while being more streamlined
and efficient as it does not rely on text fusion or multi-modal
training. This approach enables us to use the ASR model di-
rectly as either a fully-fledged diacritized ASR model for tran-
scribing unlabeled data, or as a constrained diacritic restoration
model for speech data that are labeled with undiacritized ref-
erence texts. Considering that the majority of existing speech
datasets for Arabic speech have undiacritized transcripts, the
model can be used as a robust diacritic restoration method to
complement speech data curation efforts for Arabic.
802
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
We confirm that Generative AI tools were not used to produce
any part of this manuscript.