Differentiable Pitch Matching with Auditory Models
David Marttila ID , Joshua D. Reiss ID
Centre for Digital Music, Queen Mary University of London, UK
d.marttila@qmul.ac.uk, joshua.reiss@qmul.ac.uk
Abstract
Differentiable Digital Signal Processing models for audio syn-
thesis often rely on external fundamental frequency estimators,
as common loss functions like Multi-Scale Spectral Loss (MSS)
provide uninformative gradients for frequency-related parame-
ters. While recent spectral-based losses offer improvements,
they can fail on signals where perceived pitch does not corre-
spond to a prominent spectral peak, like in the case of a missing
fundamental. We propose a novel, perceptually-informed dis-
tance metric for pitch based on features from a differentiable
computational auditory model. By processing auditory images
to extract a timbre-normalized representation of periodicity, our
metric is more robust to timbral variations. We evaluate our
approach on a synthetic pitch-matching task and show that it
can provide more informative gradients than Spectral Optimal
Transport and MSS baselines. This work is a step towards al-
lowing end-to-end training of DDSP models without external
pitch estimators.
Index Terms: DDSP, auditory models, perceptual metrics
1. Introduction
Differentiable Digital Signal Processing(DDSP) [1] is an au-
dio modeling paradigm that integrates digital signal processing
(DSP) into deep neural networks (DNNs).
DDSP has become a popular approach for a variety of au-
dio signal processing tasks, such as speech and singing syn-
thesis [2, 3], synthesizer sound matching [4], or audio effects
modeling [5]. Although the DNN and DSP design of the DDSP
models varies considerably across the different task domains, a
large majority of synthesis-focused applications useMulti-Scale
Spectral Loss(MSS) to calculate the similarity of the output to
the target audio [6].
A well-known drawback of MSS is its oscillatory loss land-
scape with respect to any parameter that controls a sinusoidal
frequency [7–9], rendering the differentiable estimation of these
parameters highly difficult. DDSP models for audio synthesis
commonly bypass this limitation by relying on external esti-
mators of the fundamental frequencyf 0 to predict frequency
controls separately and outside of the DDSP paradigm.
This restricts the capability of these models to monophonic,
harmonic signals that fall within the training distribution of the
f0 estimator. Many real-world sounds do not meet this descrip-
tion, so that task-specific approaches are needed to address the
issue of frequency-related parameters [10].
Designing loss functions that deliver more informative gra-
dients with respect to frequency has been a topic of recent re-
search interest. [11,12] Eliminating the need for externalf 0 es-
timators would reduce the complexity of DDSP models and al-
lowing the DDSP paradigm to be used across a broader range
of audio signals.
In this work, we propose the use ofauditory modelsas a
perceptually-informed distance metric for DDSP applications.
We validate its usefulness on a synthetic evaluation task, show-
ing that it can improve upon the gradient behavior of existing
loss formulations.
2. Background
2.1. Pitch matching
Along with loudness and timbre, pitch is one of the fundamental
aspects of how humans perceive sound. It may be defined as
the aspect of a sound that allows it to be ordered from high
to low, or the characteristic that gives rise to the perception of
melody [13].
Pitched sounds are often the product of repeated excita-
tion events, such as glottal pulses in voiced speech or stick-slip
events for bowed strings. This allows popular pitch estimation
algorithms for speech and music [14–17] to treatf 0 as a surro-
gate for pitch.
However, pitch andf 0 are not synonymous. Inharmonic
modal resonators, like bells, or sounds caused by turbulent
events, like gusts of wind, also evoke pitch while lacking a de-
fined fundamental frequency. The pitch of such sounds is some-
times quantified by asking human listeners to adjust thef 0 of a
pure tone until they judge its pitch to match that of the target
sound [18].
2.2. Differentiable audio metrics and pitch
This work aims to quantify the above-mentioned process of
pitch matchingin a computationally reliable manner by provid-
ing a differentiable distance metric for pitch. This has the po-
tential to improve DDSP applications like self-supervised syn-
thesizer sound matching.
Multi-scale Spectral Loss(MSS) [19] is currently the most
commonly employed loss function for these tasks. MSS
compares two audio signals via short-time Fourier transforms
(STFTs) calculated at multiple different window sizes and hop
lengths. The final loss is obtained by averaging the element-
wise distances between corresponding magnitude STFTs across
the various resolutions.
MSS is cheap to calculate and able to capture audio features
at different spectrotemporal resolutions. However, its loss land-
scape is highly oscillatory with respect to any parameter that
controls a sinusoidal frequency [7–9], resulting in uninforma-
tive gradients for those parameters.
Recently,Spectral Optimal Transport(SOT) has emerged
as a way to address this problem. Given two magnitude spectra
Xand ˆX, normalized such that PX= 1and P ˆXi = 1,
1844
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2043
0 100 200 300 400
Time [samples]
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Amplitude
Input Audio W aveform
0 500 1000 1500 2000
Fre uency [Hz]
−50
0
Magnitude [dB]
Input Audio Spectrum
(a)
0 100 200 300 400 500
Time [ ample ]
0
20
Cochlear Channel 
Neural Activity P attern
−100 −50 0 50 100
Lag [ ample ]
0
20
Cochlear Channel 
Stabilized Auditory Image (b)
0 500 1000 1500 2000
Frequency [Hz]
0.00
0.02
0.04
Magnitude
Pitchogram
Original
Timbre-Normalized
0 500 1000 1500 2000
Frequency [Hz]
0
2
Channel P ower
Cochleagram (c)
Figure 1:An illustration of the auditory feature pipeline. (a) shows the input signal, a harmonic signal withf 0 = 150Hz, whose first
three harmonic amplitudes have been set to 0. Due to the missing fundamental effect, the pitch is still perceived asf 0 (marked by the
dashed line), despite the spectrum containing no energy at that point. In the time domain waveform, the period of16000/150≈106.67
samples is clearly visible. (b) shows the neural activity patterns generated by the CARFAC auditory model, and a corresponding stabi-
lized auditory image. In the SAI, the peaks across the various channels are aligned to a common time axis, so that the periodicity be-
comes clear. (c) shows the pitchogram and cochleagram features extracted from the SAI. The spectrum of the unnormalized pitchogram
already shows a prominent peak atf 0. After applying the proposed scaling by the energy in the cochlear channels, most other peaks in
the pitchogram have disappeared, facilitating the distance calculation.
SOT uses the cost of the optimal transport map between the
two spectra as a distance measure. Ifc(i,j) =|i−j| p with
p∈R >0, SOT is given by thep-Wasserstein distanceW p be-
tweenXand ˆX. For one-dimensional mass distributions, such
as the magnitude spectra of one-dimensional signals, a compu-
tationally inexpensive closed-form solution forW p is available.
A notable characteristic of SOT is that ifxandˆxare sinusoids
with frequenciesfand ˆf,W p(X, ˆX)is directly proportional
to|f− ˆf| p [20]. This means that for the toy task of matching
the frequency of a single pure tone to that of another, the loss
landscape of SOT will be perfectly informative at every point.
Torres et al. [12] were the first to adopt SOT in a DDSP set-
ting. Their loss formulation combines conventional MSS with a
single-resolution STFT which uses SOT to calculate the frame-
wise distances. They found that this compares favorably to the
standard MSS setup for a harmonic parameter estimation task
using synthetic data. Recent DDSP publications have started to
incorporate SOT into their training objectives [21, 22].
2.3. Auditory models and feature extraction
While SOT has improved the issue of pitch gradients, any
spectrally-based distance will have limitations. Even for har-
monic signals, the perceived pitch might not be present in the
magnitude spectrum at all (known asmissing fundamental). As
noted in [23] and [12], self-supervised harmonic parameter esti-
mation models can be prone to octave errors, struggling to sum-
marize partials into the correct perceived pitch. The present
work attempts to address these limitations with a distance based
on computational models of auditory perception, an overview of
which is presented in the following.
The outer, middle, and inner ear make up theauditory pe-
riphery, which is responsible for transducing the air pressure
waves of sound into electrical signals. The neural activity pat-
terns generated by the auditory periphery are then transported
along the auditory nerve to the brain. Early theories of hear-
ing disagreed on whether these signals encode sound tempo-
rally (via nerve cells firing in synchrony with the sound waves)
or spectrally (via resonant frequencies within the cochlea). To-
day, it is generally accepted that sound arrives in the brain in
the form ofauditory images, two-dimensional representations
containing both spectral and temporal information [24].
Auditory modelsproduce auditory images by simulating the
biophysical processes of the auditory periphery. Since these
representations are understood to be the basis of how sound is
perceived in the brain, it seems reasonable to assume that they
can help machines process sound more similarly to the way hu-
mans do. A recent line of research has indeed found success in
fusing auditory models with deep learning approaches. Saddler
et al. [25] trained DNN pitch estimators on auditory images,
and found that they replicate human responses to synthetic ex-
perimental stimuli more accurately than DNNs trained directly
on audio waveforms. Going further, fully differentiable audi-
tory models have been successfully integrated into the train-
ing of DNNs for tasks like speech enhancement, noise reduc-
tion, and hearing loss compensation. Auditory models can be
made differentiable either by training a proxy DNN to emulate
the auditory periphery based on simulated data [26], or by im-
plementing the simulation itself within an auto-differentiation
framework [27, 28].
In this work, we propose a perceptual distance metric for
pitch, based on features obtained from a differentiable auditory
model. The output of the auditory model is a multi-channel sig-
nal, where the channel dimension corresponds to characteristic
frequencies of the cochlea, and the time dimension is sampled
at the same rate as the single-channel audio input. We process
this signal in a frame-based manner, and extract features that are
based primarily on the concepts described in Chapter 21 of [13]:
•Stabilized Auditory Images(SAIs) are the result of aligning
the individual channels within a given time window along a
common time axis. This stabilization serves two purposes:
it counteracts per-channel delays introduced by cochlear fil-
tering, and it decouples the frame rate from the periodicity
1845
of the signals themselves. This ensures that SAIs obtained
from consecutive input frames will be nearly identical if the
signal is stationary. SAIs can be computed by calculating the
channel-wise autocorrelation function (ACF), or by perform-
ing triggered temporal integration (TTI) [29], which corre-
lates a signal with a version of itself that is zero everywhere
except for the location of its most prominent peaks.
•Cochleagramsare a spectrum-like feature obtained by sum-
ming along the rows of the SAI, i.e. summing up the sig-
nal power contained in each individual channel of the SAI.
They represent the energy associated with the characteristic
frequencies of the cochlea filters.
•Pitchogramsare an autocorrelation-like feature obtained by
summing along the columns of the SAI. They represent the
periodicity of the overall input.
An example of these auditory features is illustrated in fig. 1.
3. Auditory Pitch Distance
This section describes the design of our proposed auditory pitch
distance for DDSP applications.
3.1. Choice of auditory model
In general, the design is agnostic of the specific model of the
auditory periphery, as long as it produces a multi-channel sig-
nal representation as described in section 2.3. In the present
work we have opted for the Cascade of Asymmetric Resonators
with Fast-Acting Compression (CARFAC) [13], since it is an
established and tested auditory model with a freely available
implementation in the JAX auto-differentiation framework.1
3.2. Disentangling pitch and timbre
The output of the auditory model is processed in overlapping
frames, for each of which we compute SAIs, pitchograms and
cochleagrams as described in section 2.3. We investigate both
ACF-based and TTI-based stabilization.
While pitchograms and cochleagrams provide a natural dis-
entangling of the auditory image into one feature for periodic-
ity and one for timbre, it is not a complete separation. Promi-
nent spectral energy corresponding to a specific channel can
lead to an over-representation of that channel’s content in the
pitchogram. Normalizing the channels by their power seems
like a simple solution, but can lead to numerical explosions in
cases like the one illustrated in fig. 1c, when channels around
the pitch frequency contain close to zero energy.
We therefore propose to de-emphasize the pitchogram in
the regions where the cochleagram contains high amounts of
energy. Specifically, we transform the pitchogramx pg[n], a
function of time lagn, into its magnitude spectrumX pg[f],
a function of frequencyf. We obtain thetimbre-normalized
pitchogramX tnpg[f]by applying the following scaling:
Xtnpg[f] =X pg[f]·2 −xcg[f] (1)
Here, we writex cg[f]to denote linearly interpolating the
cochleagramx cg at frequencyf, based on the center frequencies
of the channels represented byx cg. The scaling has no effect
wherex cg[f] = 0, but de-emphasizesX tnpg[f]wherex cg[f]is
large. Figure 1c demonstrates this for the case of an input with
a missing fundamental, where the scaling noticeably enhances
the presence of the pitch in the normalized pitchogram.
1https://github.com/google/carfac
3.3. Distance metric
Putting together the pieces, we define the auditory pitch dis-
tanceL APD(x,ˆx)between two audio signalsxandˆxusing a
combination of horizontal and vertical distances as described in
section section 2.2:
LAPD(x,ˆx) =W1

Xtnpg, ˆXtnpg

+λ
X
f
Xtnpg[f]− ˆXtnpg[f]
,
(2)
whereX tnpg and ˆXtnpg refer to the timbre-normalized
pitchogram magnitudes ofxandˆx, respectively,W 1 denotes
the 1-Wasserstein distance, andλis a weighting parameter.
4. Experimental Design
4.1. Pitch matching task
Our experimental evaluation is aimed at determining how the
proposed auditory pitch distance compares to other losses in
terms of gradient accuracy. To that end, we set up a simulated
pure-tone pitch matching task (see section 2.1). Given a dis-
tance metricLand a target audio signalx[n]of lengthL, we
will attempt to match the frequency of a sinusoid to the pitch of
x. More formally, we obtain an estimate ˆfof the true pitchf x
by optimizing
ˆf= arg min
f
L(ˆxf [n],x[n]),(3)
via gradient descent, whereˆxf [n] = sin(2πn·f/f s)is the
pure tone signal of lengthL= 8192samples corresponding to a
pitchfat sampling ratef s. Matching the evaluations performed
in previous literature, we usef s = 16kHz for all experiments.
We select 4 synthetic targets for pitch matching: Sine waves
at 160 Hz and 800 Hz; a harmonic signal with 11 harmonics,
with a fundamental frequency of 250 Hz, whose first three har-
monics have been set to zero to achieve a “missing fundamen-
tal” effect; and a square wave with 16 harmonics at 250 Hz.
Additionally, we select a real recording of a female singer per-
forming the vowel ‘a’, taken from V ocalSet [30].
Gradients are obtained by implementing the loss functions
within the auto-differentiation framework JAX. The code used
for running the experiments is available online.2
For each target, we evaluate each loss function with an esti-
mated pure tone frequency from a coarse and a fine range of
1000 values around the target’s true pitch, spaced evenly on
the logarithmic frequency scale. The coarse range stretches for
2.5 octaves in each direction, and the fine range for one semi-
tone. We report the coarse gradient accuracy (CGA) and the
fine gradient accuracy (FGA), which measure how many of the
evaluated gradients were correctly orientated to inform gradient
descent, i.e:
sgn
∂L(ˆxf [n],x[n])
∂ ˆf

=sgn( ˆf−f x)(4)
Additionally, we report the distance of the lowest evaluated
loss value from the true pitch, measured in cents.
4.2. Baselines
We compare the performance of the auditory loss to four dis-
tance metrics from the relevant literature:
2https://github.com/davidmarttila/
diff-pitch-match
1846
160 Hz Sine 800 Hz Sine 250 Hz Miss. Fund. 250 Hz Square 265 Hz V owel
CGA FGA cts CGA FGA cts CGA FGA cts CGA FGA cts CGA FGA cts
OrigMSS 49.6 65.7 0 50.8 61.3 0 53.2 32.3 2772 53.0 29.2 2874 51.8 62.6 2916
SmoothMSS 69.7 64.5 0 76.6 99.9 0 57.7 59.0 0 70.5 71.9 0 61.166.51902
SOT-2048 79.7 97.4 0 83.8100.00 54.3 65.3 2994 71.596.10 65.6 65.9 1902
SOT-512-LogF 85.4 99.9 099.999.9 0 52.9 50.0 2808 83.6 54.7 342 60.8 50.0 1878
ACF-2048 69.6 80.9 0 69.1 72.0 0 63.0 45.8 24 61.3 41.4 1476 64.3 57.4 18
ACF-512 67.5 99.9 0 70.6 73.4 0 72.5 51.4 35 67.2 43.1 1512 70.3 55.0 66
TTI-204894.3 100.00 86.6 99.3 095.8 76.8696.974.2 20493.763.9 702
TTI-512 89.6 99.9 0 91.5 98.3 0 93.5 71.7 84 93.6 65.5 138 90.1 49.2 960
Table 1:Results of the experimental evaluation. For each of the five targets, we show Coarse Gradient Accuracy (CGA) and Fine
Gradient Accuracy in %, where higher is better. The best accuracies in each column are bolded. Additionally, we show the distance of
the lowest evaluated loss value to the target pitch, measured in units of cents. Lower is better.
OrigMSSis the MSS configuration used in the seminal
DDSP paper [1], which calculates the L1 loss on both the linear
and logarithmic magnitudes of the STFT and combines them
with equal weight.
SmoothMSSis the MSS configuration proposed by Schw¨ar
and M ¨uller [11], who investigated the effects of various MSS
designs on the loss landscape for a sinusoidal frequency match-
ing task. It compresses the magnitude STFT logarithmically
and uses a flat-top window to minimize the influence of the side-
lobes on the loss.
SOT-2048andSOT-512-LogFare the best-performing
configurations from [12]. Both combine MSS with a single-
scale SOT loss, computed using a window size of 2048 and 512,
respectively.
4.3. Setup details
Models of the cochlea perform non-linear processing, which
can lead to aliasing at lower sampling rates. By default, the
CARFAC filterbank is constructed by spanning the range of
30Hz to0.85·f s/2, covering 0.5 Equivalent Rectangular Band-
widths (ERBs) per channel. Many of the parameters were cho-
sen with a default sampling rate of22050Hz in mind.
Our initial experiments atf s = 16kHz showed some un-
desirable artefacts for input pitches greater than1kHz. Reduc-
ing the cochlear resolution by increasing the distance between
adjacent channels to 1 ERB delivered a smoother output with
less artifacts. Additionally, halving the number of channels in
this way resulted in a significant reduction of the computational
cost. After settling on a configuration for CARFAC, we picked
the following four configurations of our proposed metric:
ACF-512andACF-2048calculate the SAIs and
pitchograms at frame sizes of 512 and 2048, respectively.
They stabilize the auditory image using a full symmetric
autocorrelation; after applying a Hann window and zero
padding the frames to ensure linear convolution, we can obtain
both the pitchogram and the cochleagram from the power
spectrum of the frame.
TTI-512andTTI-2048also operate at frame sizes of 512
and 2048, respectively, but perform the stabililization in the
time domain using triggered temporal integration (TTI, see sec-
tion 2.3). Frames are divided into 3 overlapping cosine win-
dows. From each of these, the highest value after applying the
window is identified as a trigger location. The SAI is then com-
puted by correlating the frame with a sparse signal that is zero
except for the locations of the triggers.
5. Results
The results of the experimental evaluation are shown in ta-
ble 1. Gradient accuracies of around 50% are essentially ran-
dom, while a gradient accuracy of 100% always points in the
correct direction. Unsurprisingly, the gradients of original MSS
are quite bad across all targets; this confirms the known issue of
this configuration with regards to pitch.
Smooth MSS is only very accurate in a fine neighborhood
around the 800 Hz sine, but not very accurate otherwise. Al-
though its loss surface can appear smooth when plotted in cer-
tain ranges, it becomes almost as oscillatory as original MSS
when evaluated at lower frequencies, or over a more densely
sampled interval.
The SOT distances perform well when applied to single
sines, which matches the theoretical justification of spectral
transport.
Among the auditory losses, TTI-2048 clearly performed the
strongest. TTI aligns to the peaks of the signals and, in contrast
to ACF, is not symmetric in time. It seems that it is the better
choice for computing SAIs for these applications.
The ACF losses were the only ones whose global loss mini-
mum came close to the true pitch of the only real recording, but
as with smooth MSS, the caveat is the low gradient accuracy
on the way there, making gradient descent likely to get stuck in
a local minimun. Matching the vowel recording’s actual pitch
proved difficult for almost all loss configurations; finding a uni-
versally applicable pitch distance remains an open problem.
The drawback of the auditory loss is the cost of backpropa-
gating through the auditory model, including all of its cochlear
channels. On average, the auditory losses took 30x as much
time to compute the gradient values compared to the other,
much faster formulations. Addressing the required computa-
tional load will be a major factor in turning auditory losses into
a useful tool for the DDSP toolbox.
6. Conclusion and future work
We presented a differentiable pitch metric based on auditory
models, aiming to enable end-to-end training of DDSP mod-
els with useful gradients with regards to pitch. Our experimen-
tal evaluation validated our approach, showing that it matches
the pitch of complex tones better than previous loss formula-
tions. However, the loss still struggled to match the pitch of real
recordings and comes with a significantly higher computational
load. In the future, we plan to assess the impact of the specifics
of the auditory model on the proposed loss’ performance and
accuracy.
1847
7. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by UK Research and Innovation [grant
number EP/S022694/1].
8. Generative AI Use Disclosure
No generative AI was used to prepare this manuscript. An-
thropic’s Claude was used to assist in performing the experi-
ments. All code was reviewed, revised, and approved by the
authors, who take full responsibility for the integrity of the
manuscript and its submission.
9. References
[1] J. Engel, L. Hantrakul, C. Gu, and A. Roberts, “DDSP: Differen-
tiable digital signal processing,” inInternational Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
[2] P. Agrawal, T. Koehler, Z. Xiu, P. Serai, and Q. He, “Ultra-
lightweight neural differential DSP vocoder for high quality
speech synthesis,” in2024 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2024.
[3] C.-Y . Yu and G. Fazekas, “Singing voice synthesis using differ-
entiable LPC and glottal-flow-inspired wavetables,” in24th In-
ternational Society for Music Informa