HRTF Personalization via Sim-to-Real Neural Field
Yoshiki Masuyama1, Gordon Wichern1, Christoph Boeddeker1, Julius Richter1,
Takahiro Edo1, Swapnil Bhosale1,2, Jonathan Le Roux1
1 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, USA
2 University of Surrey, UK
{masuyama,wichern,boeddeker,richter,leroux}@merl.com
Abstract
High-fidelity immersive audio experiences demand personal-
ized head-related transfer functions (HRTFs), because generic
HRTFs yield inaccurate perceptual localization. Neural fields
(NFs) that take the sound source direction together with a
compact set of subject-specific parameters to generate person-
alized HRTFs have achieved accurate HRTF spatial upsam-
pling. These parameters are typically optimized from measured
HRTFs, which requires an intricate measurement process in an
anechoic chamber. Towards more accessible HRTF personal-
ization, we propose a sim-to-real NF (S2RNF) that converts
HRTFs simulated from an individual’s 3D head mesh into their
realistic counterparts. Specifically, we infer S2RNF’s subject-
specific parameters from the simulated HRTFs, and use those
parameters to predict the realistic HRTFs. Our experiments
confirm that S2RNF outperforms the original simulations and
existing sim-to-real methods.
Index Terms: head-related transfer function, spatial audio, im-
mersive audio, neural field, sim-to-real
1. Introduction
Head-related transfer functions (HRTFs) describe direction-
dependent acoustic transfer functions imposed by an individ-
ual’s pinna, head, and torso [1]. By using individual HRTFs,
we can synthesize high-fidelity binaural audio and control per-
ceptual localization. Such immersive audio technology is in de-
mand for a wide range of applications such as virtual and aug-
mented reality [2]. HRTFs differ from person to person as they
depend on the shape of the pinna, head, and upper torso. Conse-
quently, a generic HRTF leads to suboptimal perceptual local-
ization, e.g., front-back confusion [3,4], and thus it is preferable
to use individual HRTFs measured on dense spatial grids. How-
ever, the measurement process requires substantial time and ef-
fort under controlled laboratory environments.
To reduce the measurement effort, HRTF spatial upsam-
pling predicts individual HRTFs for unmeasured directions
from sparse measurements. Early works relied on signal pro-
cessing, including amplitude panning [5, 6] and spatial ba-
sis decomposition [7, 8]. Rapid advances in deep learning
have led to substantial improvements in upsampling perfor-
mance [9–13], particularly with neural fields (NFs) [14–18].
NFs are trained to predict the HRTF from a given sound source
direction in a gridless manner. Recent works typically share an
NF across multiple subjects and personalize the generic NF by
conditioning it using a compact set of subject-specific parame-
ters [15,16]. Alongside community efforts such as the 2024 Lis-
tener Acoustic Personalization (LAP) Challenge [19], state-of-
This work was done while S. Bhosale was an intern at MERL.
S2RNF
S2RNF
Realistic HRTFs
Simulator
Direction
3D head mesh
Simulated HRTFs
Direction
Eq. (6)
Figure 1:Overview of S2RNF’s inference procedure. S2RNF
infers subject-specific parametersz i so that the reconstruc-
tion error on simulated HRTFsA i,0 is minimized. Realistic
HRTFs ˆAi,1 are obtained using the estimated parameters ˆzi
and changing the condition from simulated to real.
the-art methods have demonstrated promising upsampling per-
formance even from only three measurements [18].
Spatial upsampling still requires a few individual HRTF
measurements, i.e., each subject needs to visit a laboratory with
specialized equipment. In contrast, measurement-free person-
alization aims to predict personalized HRTFs from only anthro-
pometric features and/or 3D meshes that are measurable even
in everyday environments. One approach is to numerically sim-
ulate personalized HRTFs from a 3D mesh [20, 21], e.g., using
Mesh2HRTF [22]. This approach can exploit well-developed
prior knowledge of sound propagation but typically causes ar-
tifacts at high frequencies. An alternative is a data-driven ap-
proach that learns a mapping from anthropometric features to
personalized HRTFs [23–29]. A promising direction is to com-
bine both approaches by refining the simulated HRTFs using a
neural network to suppress the simulation-based artifacts [30].
In this paper, we propose a sim-to-real NF (S2RNF) that
personalizes an NF predicting realistic HRTFs using simu-
lated HRTFs. Building upon NFs with subject-specific param-
eters [15, 16], S2RNF further incorporates domain-specific pa-
rameters that specify the domain (simulated or real) of the out-
put HRTFs as illustrated in Fig. 1. These parameters allow
S2RNF to compute the subject-specific parameters from only
the simulated HRTFs. Then, S2RNF predicts realistic, person-
alized HRTFs for arbitrary directions by changing the domain-
696
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1391
specific parameters to those of the real domain. In our ex-
periments, S2RNF provides substantial performance gains over
simulated HRTFs and outperforms an existing method [30].
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Problem setting
Let us define an HRTF at both ears for subjectiasH i(d)∈
C2×F , whereFis the number of frequency bins,d= (θ,ϕ)
is the sound source direction, andθ∈[0,2π)andϕ∈
[−π/2,π/2]are the azimuth and elevation, respectively. This
paper focuses on modeling the log-magnitude response:
Ai(d) = 20 log 10(|Hi(d)|)∈R 2×F.(1)
The magnitude response is crucial for the elevation localiza-
tion [31] and inherently covers the interaural level difference
that is important for azimuth localization. HRTFs vary across
subjects, i.e.,A i1 (d)̸=A i2 (d)fori 1̸=i 2, due to the dif-
ferences in head and ear shapes. HRTF personalization aims
to approximate a function that maps directiondto the indi-
vidual HRTFA i(d)for each subjecti. Once the magnitude
response is predicted, the corresponding phase can be obtained
via minimum-phase reconstruction1 [32].
2.2. Neural fields (NFs) for HRTF spatial upsampling
NFs have been widely used to represent HRTFs as a function
ofddue to their powerful modeling capability [15–18]. Re-
cent works share an NF across subjects, and condition it by a
compact set of subject-specific parametersz i [15–17]:
Ai(d)≈NF(d,z i),(2)
wherez i allows for the personalization of the output HRTF. The
parameters can be a vector concatenated withdas input [15] or
a tuple of low-rank matrices for advanced conditioning [16].
The NF in (2) is typically trained on HRTFs for multiple sub-
jects to minimize the log-spectral distortion (LSD) [19]:
L(Ai(d), ˆAi(d)) = 1
2
√
F
X
ch∈C
∥Ach
i (d)− ˆAch
i (d)∥2,(3)
where ˆAch
i (d)∈R F is the predicted HRTF for each ear, and
C={left,right}.
When sparse HRTF measurements for the target subject are
available, HRTF personalization can be realized by adapting
zi based on the measurements. In [15],z i is extracted from
the measured HRTFs using the implicit gradient origin network
(IGON) framework [33]. Specifically,z i is updated by one
gradient-descent step from the originz=0with unit step size:
ˆzi =− 1
|B|
X
b∈B
∇zL(Ai(db),NF(d b,z))| z=0,(4)
whereb∈Bindexes the sparse measurements, and|B|denotes
the number of measurements. IGON allows encoding the mea-
sured HRTFs intoz i without additional encoders, but requires
at least a few HRTF measurements per subject.
2.3. Measurement-free HRTF personalization
HRTF personalization without individual measurements is de-
sirable, as the measurement process requires a specialized en-
1The interaural time difference should also be personalized to im-
prove the immersive audio experience. We defer this to future work.
vironment such as an anechoic chamber. A common approach
is to train a neural network to predict the personalized HRTFs
from anthropometric features [23–29]. Recent works factorize
this task using a pre-trained HRTF autoencoder [27, 28]. The
anthropometric features are first mapped to a subject-specific
latent variable of the autoencoder, similar tozi in (2). The latent
variable is then decoded to a magnitude response by using the
pre-trained decoder. Another promising approach is to simulate
HRTFs from an individual’s 3D mesh and refine the simulated
HRTFs using a neural network [30]. This approach can exploit a
well-developed physics-based simulator and reduce the artifacts
from the simulation in a data-driven manner. We will follow the
latter approach, building on recent advances in NFs.
3. Sim-to-Real Neural Field (S2RNF)
3.1. Overview of S2RNF
Building on the success of NFs in HRTF spatial upsampling, we
formulate HRTF personalization as the adaptation of a generic
NF to a target subject. The problem reduces to inferring the
subject-specific parametersz i in (2) from simulated HRTFs,
thereby avoiding the requirement of individual HRTFs that
should be measured in an anechoic chamber. The simulated
HRTFs are considerably more accessible because they can be
simulated from a 3D head mesh acquired in typical indoor envi-
ronments using open-source software (e.g., Mesh2HRTF [22]).
To this end, we propose S2RNF, which enables sim-to-
real transfer of HRTFs by inferring subject-specific parame-
ters shared across simulated and measured HRTFs. Specifi-
cally, S2RNF leverages additional domain-specific parameters
wj, wherej= 0andj= 1correspond to the simulated and
measured HRTFs, respectively:
Ai,j(d)≈S2RNF(d,z i,w j),(5)
whereA i,j(d)is the simulated (j= 0) or measured (j= 1)
HRTF for subjectiand directiond. As depicted in Figure 1,
we first inferz i from the simulated HRTFsA i,0(d)withw 0.
Then, by switching the domain-specific parameters tow 1, we
can predict realistic HRTFs ˆAi,1(d). In contrast to an ex-
isting sim-to-real method that directly refines the simulated
HRTFs [30], S2RNF uses the simulated HRTFs for only com-
putingz i. S2RNF can thus predict realistic HRTFs in a gridless
manner regardless of the spatial grids for the simulation.
The design of S2RNF is inspired by the subject- and
dataset-aware NF (SuDaField) [34], which proposed the use of
domain-specific parameters to train an NF on multiple HRTF
datasets. HRTFs from different datasets exhibit distinctive char-
acteristics due to mismatched measurement conditions [35], and
the domain-specific parameters are used to capture these mis-
matches. While SuDaField may combine simulated and mea-
sured datasets for training, it was not explicitly designed for
and evaluated in sim-to-real transfer. In contrast, S2RNF aims
at sim-to-real transfer, and we accordingly design the training
procedure, as described in the following section.
3.2. Training of S2RNF
Inspired by HRTF field [15], we encode the simulated HRTFs
intoz i using the IGON framework [33]:
ˆzi =− 1
|Benc
0 |
X
b∈Benc
0
∇zL(Ai,0(db),S2RNF(d b,z,w 0))|z=0,
(6)
697
whereB enc
0 ⊂B 0 is a set of direction indices for inferringz i,
andB 0 is a set of direction indices for the simulated HRTFs.
Note that the gradient in (6) can be derived using automatic dif-
ferentiation in a deep learning framework. Once ˆzi is obtained,
S2RNF estimates realistic, personalized HRTFs by swapping
the domain-specific parameters tow 1:
ˆAi,1(d) =S2RNF(d, ˆzi,w 1).(7)
Thanks to the efficient one-step gradient descent of the IGON
framework, we can explicitly transfer the simulated HRTFs to
realistic ones at each training step, through (6)–(7), in a manner
consistent with the inference procedure. This allows us to opti-
mize the network using a loss function defined on the predicted
realistic HRTFs ˆAi,1(d). This approach is much simpler than
the iterative optimization ofz i in SuDaField [34], which would
make training through explicit sim-to-real transfer impractical.
We jointly optimize S2RNF’s parameters and the domain-
specific parametersw j forj∈{0,1}by minimizing the sum
of the following loss functionsL 1 +λL 0 via backpropagation:
L1 =
X
i∈I
X
b∈Bdec
1
L(Ai,1(db),S2RNF(d b, ˆzi,w 1)),(8)
L0 =
X
i∈I
X
b∈Bdec
0
L(Ai,0(db),S2RNF(d b, ˆzi,w 0)),(9)
whereIis a set of subjects within a training dataset,B dec
0 ⊂B 0,
Bdec
1 ⊂B 1, andB 1 is a set of direction indices for the measured
HRTFs. We set the balancing parameterλto1. Our final goal
is to minimizeL 1 in (8) on unseen test subjects, but we find that
includingL 0 in (9) helps the training of S2RNF. Note that the
sum of two loss functions is back-propagated all the way tow 0
in (6) by keeping the entire computational graph.
During training, we first sample a random half subset of
directions fromB 0 asB enc
0 in (6), and assign the other direc-
tions toB dec
0 to calculate the loss functionL 0. While that is not
required, we share the same directions betweenB dec
0 andB dec
1
to simplify the implementation by assuming the simulated and
measured HRTFs share the same spatial grids. At inference, we
use all the directions inB 0 to infer ˆzi, i.e.,B enc
0 =B 0.
3.3. Network architecture for S2RNF
While various neural network architectures are applicable to
S2RNF, this paper focuses on neural networks with the bias-
terms fine-tuning (BitFit) [36] following [16, 34]. As depicted
in Fig. 2, our network mainly consists of fully-connected (FC)
layers that take the random Fourier features (RFF) [37] of the
sound source direction as input:
µ= [sin(θ−π),cos(θ−π),sin(ϕ),cos(ϕ)] T,(10)
xRFF = [sin(Qµ) T,cos(Qµ) T]T,(11)
whereQ∈R (C/2)×4 is sampled from an isotropic Gaussian
distribution,Cis the number of hidden units of the following
FC layers, and(·) T denotes the transpose. Then,x RFF is passed
to an FC layer, resulting inx0, and fed into two core blocks with
skip connections (shaded blocks in Fig. 2). In the core blocks,
we apply subject-specific or domain-specific biases (z i,l∈R C
orw j,l∈R C) at each FC layer as follows:
xl =
(
Swish(Plxl−1 +b l +z i,l)Subject-specific,
Swish(Plxl−1 +b l +w j,l)Domain-specific, (12)
LNFC FC FC
FC
RFF
FC FC LN
Figure 2:Network architecture for S2RNF . FC and LN stand for
a fully-connected layer and layer normalization, respectively.
wherel= 1,...,Ldenotes the index of the FC layers inside
the core blocks, andP l∈R C×C andb l∈R C respectively are
the weight matrix and bias at thelth layer. In Fig. 2,Lis set
to 4, and the first FC layer leverages the subject-specific bias,
while the other layers take the domain-specific ones, following
the main experiment of SuDaField [34]. The prediction head
outputs the two-channel log-magnitude spectra without any ac-
tivation function.
4. Experiments
4.1. Comparison with baselines on SONICOM dataset
We first validate the personalization performance of S2RNF on
an extended version [38] of the SONICOM dataset [39]. The
extended version provides 200 pairs of measured and simulated
HRTFs. HRTFs were measured at 793 directions for each sub-
ject, and we used those with a sampling rate of 48 kHz. The
simulated HRTFs were computed for the same source direc-
tions from 3D head meshes using Mesh2HRTF [22]. The time-
domain impulse responses were converted to the frequency
domain using the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) with 256
points, i.e.,F= 129. The HRTF pairs were randomly split into
160, 15, and 25 subjects for the training, validation, and test
sets, respectively.
The architecture of S2RNF is depicted in Fig. 2, where the
four hidden FC layers have 512 units with the Swish activa-
tion, i.e.,C= 512. No activation function is applied in the
prediction head. We trained S2RNF for 1500 epochs using the
RAdam optimizer with a constant learning rate of 0.0005. We
used the checkpoint with the lowest validation LSD on the mea-
sured HRTFs for evaluation. Our code is available online2.
For evaluation, we used the root mean squared error
(RMSE) and the mean absolute error (MAE) between the true
and predicted log-magnitude spectra. The RMSE coincides
with LSD in (3). The errors were calculated up to 20 kHz
except for the DC component as in previous works [19, 30].
Furthermore, we evaluated a perceptual metric, Polar RMSE
(PolRMSE) [40]. Specifically, an auditory model estimates the
source direction from each HRTF [41], and RMSE between the
estimated directions is used as a metric. As we focus on magni-
tude modeling, we adopt only polar angles following [42].
Since we focus on measurement-free HRTF personaliza-
tion, we cannot fairly compare S2RNF with recent NF-based
methods that require at least a few HRTF measurements per
subject [17,18]. We thus used the simulated HRTFs and the log-
magnitude responses averaged over the training subjects, i.e.,
non-personalized HRTFs, as baselines. Note that the average
2https://github.com/merlresearch/s2rnf
698
Table 1:Results on the SONICOM dataset.
MAE [dB] RMSE [dB] PolRMSE [degree]
Mesh2HRTF 7.50 10.53 42.27
Avg. HRTF 3.78 5.05 41.63
S2RNF 3.60 4.90 40.89
w/o Sim. Loss 3.66 4.98 41.07
5 10 15 20
Frequency [kHz]
2
4
6
8Spectral distortion [dB]
Sim
Avg
S2RNF
Figure 3:Spectral distortion averaged over both ears and all
directions. The solid lines and shaded areas correspond to the
mean and standard deviation over subjects.
baseline achieves reasonable performance even compared with
recent spatial upsampling methods [19] despite its simplicity.
Table 1 presents the results averaged over the 25 test sub-
jects. The HRTFs simulated by Mesh2HRTF result in large
errors, which is consistent with findings from [30]. The av-
erage baseline, i.e., non-personalized HRTFs, performs much
better than the simulated HRTFs. Our S2RNF outperforms the
average baseline in all metrics, where the standard deviation
of MAE across subjects is0.48, while the standard deviation
for the baseline is0.59. Although the performance improve-
ment may not seem huge, the effectiveness of S2RNF was val-
idated by a paired one-sided t-test on MAE across test subjects
(p= 1.5%). As an ablation study, we compare the perfor-
mance with S2RNF trained without the loss function on simu-
lated HRTFsL 0 in (9). It consistently degrades the performance
as shown in the bottom row of Table 1. It is likely beneficial to
fit the model parameters to simulated HRTFs when extracting
zi from the simulated HRTFs with the IGON framework.
Figure 3 shows the frequency-wise spectral distortion av-
eraged over both channels and all directions. First, we can
observe that the spectral distortion for the simulated HRTFs
becomes significantly large at high frequency, which is again
consistent with [30]. S2RNF reduces spectral distortion, es-
pecially around 5 kHz to 15 kHz. Since spectral notches and
peaks in this frequency range affect perceptual elevation local-
ization [43], this behavior of S2RNF is preferable.
4.2. Comparison with prior methods on HUTUBS dataset
We compare S2RNF with existing measurement-free HRTF
personalization methods on the HUTUBS dataset [44], as it pro-
vides manually curated anthropometric features in addition to
measured and simulated HRTFs. The HUTUBS dataset con-
tains HRTFs from 96 subjects with 440 source directions per
subject. To ensure a fair comparison with prior work relying
on the anthropometric features [28], we excluded three subjects
whose anthropometric features are unavailable (IDs 18, 79, and
92), as well as two repeated measurements (IDs 88 and 96). We
Table 2:Results on the HUTUBS dataset.
MAE [dB] RMSE [dB] PolRMSE [degree]
Mesh2HRTF† 7.23 - -
SPCA-DNN† [24] 6.89 - -
BEM-DNN† [30] 4.80 - -
Mesh2HRTF‡ 7.14 9.38 36.60
Proto. DNN [28] 3.69 5.1032.90
S2RNF 3.66 5.0233.22
†Scores are taken from [30], where the test subjects were not reported.
‡The official simulated HRTFs are spatially downsampled to align the
grid with the measured HRTFs.
used the first 85 subjects as a fixed training set and performed
leave-one-out evaluation over the remaining 6 subjects, using 5
subjects for validation.
The simulated HRTFs in the official dataset were com-
puted using Mesh2HRTF [22] on a dense spatial grid that does
not match the grid for measured HRTFs. We aligned the grid
by interpolating the simulated HRTFs using a panning-based
method [6]. The time-domain responses were converted to the
frequency domain by DFT with 442 points, resulting in a fre-
quency resolution of around 100 Hz [30].
Since the HUTUBS dataset provides additional anthropo-
metric features, various measurement-free methods have been
developed and applied to it. SPCA-DNN decomposes HRTFs
using spatial principal component analysis (SPCA) and es-
timates individual principal components from the anthropo-
metric features [24]. BEM-DNN applies SPCA to the mis-
match between the simulated and measured HRTFs, refin-
ing the simulated HRTFs based on the anthropometric fea-
tures [30]. Proto. DNN [28] leverages a pre-trained HRTF au-
toencoder [45] and estimates a subject-specific latent variable
of the autoencoder (close to ourz i) from the anthropometric
features. We emphasize that S2RNF does not rely on the an-
thropometric features.
Table 2 summarizes the results on the HUTUBS dataset.
Since the network and training details of [30] were not reported,
we borrow their reported scores. The MAE gap between the two
simulated HRTFs (Mesh2HRTF) may come from the mismatch
of the test subjects and/or the grid interpolation. S2RNF im-
proves the MAE compared to BEM-DNN by over 1 dB, which
is much larger than the observed Mesh2HRTF mismatch (0.09
dB). Compared with Proto. DNN, whose training setup is fully
aligned with ours, we achieved slightly better spectral distor-
tions. Note that Proto. DNN requires an additional encoder
to map the anthropometric features to the latent. Meanwhile,
S2RNF can inferz i without any encoder thanks to the IGON
framework.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we present S2RNF that transfers individual simu-
lated HRTFs to realistic ones, which enables measurement-free
HRTF personalization. By incorporating the domain-specific
parameters, we can infer the subject-specific parameters, shared
across the simulated and measured HRTFs, from only the sim-
ulated HRTFs. S2RNF outperforms the non-personalized av-
erage baseline on the SONICOM dataset, and achieves bet-
ter spectral distortion compared with existing methods on the
HUTUBS dataset. While this work relies on the simulated
HRTFs in the official datasets, which are computed from high-
fidelity 3D head meshes, our future work will explore S2RNF
with meshes reconstructed from photogrammetry data [46].
699
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
The authors used Generative AI to assist with language editing
and polishing of the manuscript. In Fig. 1, the 3D head mesh
and listening setup are AI-generated illustrations.