Montreal Forced Aligner and the state of speech-to-text alignment in 2026
Michael McAuliffe ID 1,2,∗∗, Kaylynn Gunter ID 3, Michael Wagner ID 2, Morgan Sonderegger ID 2
1 University of Wisconsin–Madison, USA
2 McGill University and Centre for Brain, Language, and Music, Canada
3 University of Oregon, USA
mcauliffe3@wisc.edu, kgunter@uoregon.edu, chael@mcgill.ca, morgan.sonderegger@mcgill.ca
Abstract
The Montreal Forced Aligner (MFA) was released in 2016
and has since become the most widely used tool for forced
alignment in research and industry. In the decade since, MFA
has undergone substantial development, including expanded
coverage across more languages and dialects using larger open-
source datasets, harmonized IPA dictionaries, model adaptation,
cross-language phone remapping, and support utilities. This
paper documents MFA 3.0’s developments since version 1.0
and evaluates MFA’s performance across English, Japanese, and
Korean, benchmarked against classic and neural forced aligners.
MFA 3.0 achieves state-of-the-art or near state-of-the-art perfor-
mance across all four benchmark datasets with mean boundary
errors below 15 ms. Adaptation and cross-language remapping
are effective for languages outside MFA’s training distribution,
and pronunciation probability modeling and phonological rules
provide gains in specific conditions.
Index Terms: forced alignment, speech-to-text alignment, pho-
netic segmentation
1. Introduction
Forced alignment, the automatic temporal alignment of words
and phonemes to a speech recording given its orthographic tran-
scription, has become a standard first step in language science
research across (socio)phonetics, language documentation, and
psycholinguistics. Many forced aligners have been developed
over the past 20 years (e.g., [1, 2, 3, 4]), and the field has a
healthy ecosystem of tools for different use cases. The Mon-
treal Forced Aligner [5], released in 2016, has become the most
widely used of these. In the intervening years, MFA has under-
gone substantial development, and the field has changed con-
siderably: new aligners using neural ASR architectures have
been proposed, larger and more diverse training datasets have
become available, and the range of languages and use cases
has expanded. Despite this, no systematic evaluation of current
MFA against the range of available aligners has been published
since its initial release; existing comparisons of forced align-
ers consider a small number of aligners and/or are restricted to
English, and use different datasets and metrics (e.g., [6, 7, 8]).
In tandem with advances in the field, MFA has expanded
its core functionality to leverage new data and tools and address
common bottlenecks in language research pipelines, including
incorporating libraries for transcription, tokenization, and cor-
pus creation. The goal of this paper is two-fold: to document
key developments in MFA since version 1.0, and to provide
a systematic benchmark of MFA 3.0 against a range of cur-
rently available aligners across three languages. We evaluate
**indicates the corresponding author.
MFA’s performance on detecting word and phone boundaries in
laboratory and conversational speech, and assess the contribu-
tion of MFA-specific functionality—adaptation, cross-language
remapping, pronunciation probability modeling, and phonolog-
ical rules—to alignment performance. MFA 3.0 achieves state-
of-the-art performance across all three languages, outperform-
ing classical and neural aligners in most comparisons, with
mean boundary errors consistently below 15 ms.
2. Background
Development of MFA from 1.0 to 3.0 has been driven by rapid
expansion in theuse casesof forced aligners in scientific re-
search and thedata and toolsavailable. We briefly cover each
to motivate the features of MFA 3.0 described in Sec. 3.
2.1. Use cases
A forced aligner consists minimally of anacoustic modeland
pronunciation dictionary; ten years ago aligners were applied to
a few high-resource languages 1 with fixed broad-transcription
dictionaries assuming a standard dialect (e.g. [9, 1, 4, 2]).
Forced aligners are now used across a much wider range
of languages, dialects, and speaker populations, including low-
resource and endangered languages [10, 11, 12, 13, 14], diverse
dialects [15, 16], child speech [17, 6, 18], and L2 speech [19].
This has gone hand-in-hand with expansion in the number of
languages covered out-of-the-box by MFA (Table 2) as well
as other aligners [3, 20, 21], meaning the software has a pre-
trained acoustic model and either a pronunciation dictionary or
a grapheme-to-phoneme (G2P) tool.
This expanded range of use cases has made how best to train
and deploy forced aligners for target data outside their train-
ing data its own research area (e.g. [13, 14, 18, 22, 23, 24]),
and three broad strategies have emerged: (1) Using a pretrained
aligner as-is, relying on acoustic model robustness. (2) Adapt-
ing a pretrained aligner to the target language, dialect, or pop-
ulation via acoustic model adaptation or phone set remapping.
(3) Training a new aligner on target domain data.
This literature has found each strategy is effective in dif-
ferent cases, but in general training data quantity and diversity
trumps language-specificity, with models trained on the largest
datasets (e.g. MFA 3.0 Global-English) competitive with or bet-
ter than smaller language/dialect-specific ones. Strategies (2)
and (3) are enabled by easilytrainablealigners, beginning with
the ProsodyLab aligner [4], the precursor to MFA. The three
strategies correspond to the three features of MFA 3.0 evalu-
ated in this paper’s experiments: improved pretrained models,
1Except the Munich AUtomatic Segmentation system (MAUS),
which by 2012 supported 7 languages [3].
347
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2734
adaptation and remapping, and training from scratch.
Use cases have also expanded in terms of phonetic detail,
reflected in the pronunciation dictionary. Demand has grown
for narrower transcription reflecting dialectal forms and proba-
bilistic pronunciation modeling, in parallel with forced aligners
being increasingly used to study phonetic variation by choosing
between variants of the same word [25, 26, 27, 28, 29]. This has
motivated a broader range of pronunciation dictionaries across
forced aligners, with MFA in particular transitioning to an IPA
phone set and trainable pronunciation probabilities (Sec. 3.1.2).
2.2. Data and tools
The data and tools available for building forced aligners
have expanded substantially since MFA 1.0. Large open-
source speech datasets—such as CommonV oice [30], Multi-
lingual LibriSpeech [31], and many others on OpenSLR and
elsewhere—have made it feasible to train acoustic models on
hundreds to thousands of hours across many languages in MFA
3.0, orders of magnitude more than was available 10 years ago.
Crowd-sourced pronunciation resources such as WikiPron [32]
and better grapheme-to-phoneme (G2P) systems [33, 34, 35]
have greatly expanded cross-linguistic pronunciation coverage.
At the same time, the increase in data quantity has come with
increased variability in quality, driving development of tool-
ing for checking and correcting datasets: a key part of MFA
development described in Sec. 3.3, and other speech database
systems [36, 37]. Open-source tools for diarization (e.g. Pyan-
note [38]) and transcription (e.g. WhisperX [39], SpeechBrain
[40]) have enabled increasingly automated end-to-end corpus
processing and phonetic analysis pipelines (e.g. [41, 42]), moti-
vating MFA’s integrations with these tools (Sec. 3.3).
2.2.1. Neural architectures
Forced aligners ten years ago were developed using classic
HMM-GMM systems built with HTK [43], Julius [44], or Kaldi
[45], where phone and word boundaries are a by-product of
the ASR process. The field of ASR has since seen dramatic
advances through neural architectures, with end-to-end models
achieving much lower word error rates. Some neural ASR sys-
tems output word boundaries and can be used as forced aligners,
but are not optimized for fine temporal boundary placement:
with no pronunciation dictionary and no intermediate phone-
level representation, they are trained to produce correct output
strings rather than precise frame-level alignments, and CTC-
based systems in particular explicitly collapse across different
alignments for the same string [7]. We replicate and extend
[7]’s comparison of MFA with neural ASR-based aligners us-
ing a wider set of aligners, including NeMo [46].
Recently, neural systems have been developed specifically
for the forced alignment or phonetic segmentation task, includ-
ing the Mason-Alberta Phonetic Segmentor (MAPS: [8]), Char-
siu [47], and the Bournemouth Forced Aligner (BFA: [21]),
achieving competitive phone-level alignment performance. We
include these in our evaluation (Sec. 5).
3. Montreal Forced Aligner 3.0
MFA is an open-source command line utility with prebuilt ex-
ecutables for Windows, Mac OSX, and Linux [5]. MFA 3.0
extends version 1.0 in four main areas. First, it leverages the
increase in available data to provide an expanded set of pre-
trained acoustic models with greater coverage of languages and
linguistic/social variation therein (Sec. 3.1). Second, for use
cases where out-of-the-box support is unavailable or insuffi-
cient, MFA 3.0 includes utilities for adapting acoustic models to
novel languages and populations (Sec. 3.2). Third, it integrates
with open-source libraries to facilitate corpus creation and iter-
atively improving alignments (Sec. 3.3). Finally, MFA 3.0 em-
phasizes usability and iterative refinement as core design prin-
ciples, with documentation and utilities to support each stage of
the alignment pipeline (Sec. 3.4).
3.1. Pretrained models
3.1.1. Training data
Pretrained models and dictionaries for MFA 1.0 were largely
based on GlobalPhone corpora [48], which range from 8 hours
of speech to 30 hours of speech, with the exception of English
which was trained on 1,000 hours of LibriSpeech [49]. Pre-
trained models for MFA 3.0 leverage large open-source speech
datasets such as CommonV oice [30] and datasets on OpenSLR
(e.g. Multilingual LibriSpeech [31]) to train on data several or-
ders of magnitude larger than 1.0, as seen in Table 2. There
is also an increase in the coverage of variation. Datasets in
MFA 1.0 primarily included data from single dialects (e.g.,
only Brazilian Portuguese), while MFA 3.0 includes multiple
dialects (e.g., Brazilian and European Portuguese) for broader
coverage in pronunciation variability. While several datasets
have explicit information about dialect areas, others are un-
specified and contain a mix of dialect variation within the
dataset, including occasionally second language (L2) speak-
ers. In addition to dialect coverage, these datasets also cover
a range of speech styles (read and conversational), recording
environments, and noise. Corpora used to train each MFA
3.0 acoustic model are detailed athttps://mfa-models.
readthedocs.io/en/latest/acoustic/.
All datasets have undergone substantial manual cleaning to
improve data quality from the source releases, which we be-
lieve is crucial for making the pretrained models viable. The
types of issues encountered include transcription errors, miss-
ing or incorrect speaker labels, extensive background noise,
and various metadata, file format, and normalization errors.
Each corpus required different preparation and cleaning, and the
process was iterative and empirically driven: inspecting poor
alignments, diagnosing errors, correcting issues across entire
corpora, and repeating. This methodology motivated the de-
velopment of dedicated corpus creation and correction tooling
(Sec. 3.3). Still, given the scale of the data, some errors persist
and many datasets contain other sources of noise like poor audio
quality, which we mitigate through the structure of the training
regime.
3.1.2. Pronunciation dictionaries
MFA 1.0 contained dictionaries for 20 languages, which were
sourced for most languages (besides English, French, German)
from the GlobalPhone corpus [50], which provided only partial
lexical coverage and contained transcription errors. For MFA
3.0, pronunciation dictionaries for the 20 core supported lan-
guages (Table 2) have been rebuilt, now largely sourced from
WikiPron [32], which scrapes crowd-sourced pronunciations
from Wiktionary and provides broader lexical coverage and nar-
rower phonetic variation. Dictionaries were supplemented with
G2P models trained on cleaned versions of the WikiPron dic-
tionaries. Rather than using a fixed language-specific phone set
(such as ARPAbet for English as in MFA 1.0), MFA 3.0 uses a
cross-linguistically harmonized narrow IPA phone set, cleaned,
348
standardized, and extended with implementations of basic allo-
phonic variation across languages 2, though an English ARPA-
bet model is still provided due to widespread usage. In total,
MFA 3.0 provides dictionaries for 22 languages, with additional
dialect dictionary support for 5 languages spanning 15 dialects
(see Table 1). The dictionaries for the remaining 17 languages
are sourced from WikiPron and are limited in descriptions and
availability of dialect forms. We treat the dialect as unspecified,
but most forms are likely from standardized varieties.
Dictionary coverage is extended to 34 additional languages
through integration of the V oxCommunis pronunciation dictio-
naries [41], generated using the XPF [35] and Epitran [34] G2P
systems, which MFA hosts to enable users to train aligners and
align corpora in languages not covered by the core pretrained
models. For out-of-vocabulary items across the 21 core lan-
guages, MFA includes G2P functionality based on a pair n-
gram model trained from the pronunciation dictionary, using a
weighted FST implementation of Phonetisaurus [51] via Pynini
[33].
Table 1:Training data differences for pretrained models in MF A
1.0 (left) and 3.0 (right). New dialects in 3.0 are underlined.
Language Hours Speakers Dialect
Bulgarian 8.0→35.1 77→172 Unspecified
Czech 31.7→621.6 101→1.2k Unspecified
English 982.1→3.5k 2.4k→72kUS, UK , India ,
Nigeria, L2
French 27.0→1.0k 100→18k Unspecified
German 18.3→1.3k 77→18k Unspecified
Hausa 8.7→20.6 103→126 Unspecified
Japanese N/A→242.6 N/A→2k Unspecified
Korean 20.9→99.7 99→301 Unspecified
Mandarin 31.2→734.5 132→7.3kChina, Taiwan
Polish 24.5→340.1 99→3.2k Unspecified
Portuguese 26.3→783.1 102→2.9kBrazil, Portugal
Russian 26.5→443.1 115→3.2k Unspecified
Serbo-
Croatian
15.9→22.5 94→258 Unspecified
Spanish 22.1→1.5k 100→18kLatin-America,
Spain
Swahili 11.1→434.5 70→1.2k Unspecified
Swedish 21.7→439.0 98→1.6k Unspecified
Thai 28.2→244.9 98→6.8k Unspecified
Turkish 17.1→127.8 100→1.5k Unspecified
Ukrainian 14.1→191.4 119→1.2k Unspecified
Vietnamese 19.7→41.3 129→344Hanoi, Ho Chi
Minh City, Hue
3.1.3. Training regime
MFA 3.0 training builds from MFA 1.0 to more effectively
use larger training datasets and integrates explicit pronuncia-
tion modeling. MFA uses a classical HMM-GMM architecture,
adapted from Kaldi [45] recipes. MFA 1.0 used a three stage
training pipeline [5]: (1) monophone GMMs training; (2) tri-
phone GMMs training to account for surrounding phonetic con-
text; (3) speaker-adapted triphone training (SAT). In MFA 3.0,
2https://mfa-models.readthedocs.io/en/latest/mfa phone set.html.
Mapping alignments to ‘broad transcription’, e.g. the MFA phone set
to ARPABET, is possible using ‘mfa remap alignments‘.
two additional training stages have been added. First an addi-
tional stage of triphone training using feature transforms from
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) has been added prior to
the SAT stage. Second, MFA incorporates pronunciation and
inter-word silence estimation into the lexicon [52].
The training regime has also been updated to leverage avail-
able training data while mitigating the impacts of less controlled
data. The increased range of styles and speakers has been a net
positive for modeling, but newer datasets often have quality is-
sues. For example, CommonV oice is a crowd-sourced dataset
and is especially liable to contain utterances with background
noise or speech, which makes these recordings liable to intro-
duce errors that propagate to later training stages. However,
adding data into later training stages improves the performance
of alignment on different styles of speech (e.g., conversational)
and with variable environmental noise.
As such, MFA 3.0 uses a data mixing strategy that incorpo-
rates noisier datasets progressively in the training cycles. For
one initial training cycle (from monophone to SAT training)
MFA uses clean and controlled corpora (like GlobalPhone [48]
or Multilingual LibriSpeech [31]), and mixing in noisier cor-
pora in iterations of SAT and pronunciation modeling (like the
Multilingual TEDx corpora [53]), and then using Common-
V oice in the final round of training (see Table 2). For each of
the training blocks, where relevant, each dialect is represented
equally in the subset. Where equal distributions of dialects are
not represented, then the underrepresented dialect is used max-
imally, and the other dialect(s) fill the rest of the subset.
Table 2:Training regime for MF A 3.0. Initial subsets only
use read speech from clean corpora, with progressively noisier
speech and recording conditions.
Type Utterances Data
Monophone 10k Read
Triphone 20k Read
LDA 20k Read
SAT 20k Read
SAT 50k +Spontaneous
Pronunciation probability 50k +Spontaneous
SAT 150k +Spontaneous
Pronunciation probability 150k +Spontaneous
SAT All +Noisy
For a subset of languages where noisy datasets such as
CommonV oice constitute the primary training data (e.g. Rus-
sian, Czech, Spanish, Portuguese), we made manually corrected
alignments to help guide training. Manually corrected align-
ments are used during training to constrain the alignments. The
manual alignment is used to compare the predicted phone labels
for a given frame to the ground truth label. When the ground
truth label is not within the given set of predicted labels, the
log-likelihoods associated with the predicted phones are over-
ridden with a log-likelihood of -100,000.
MFA 3.0 incorporates explicit pronunciation probability
modeling into the default training pipeline (“Pronunciation
probability” in Table 2), following the implementation of [52]
in Kaldi. After each SAT stage, pronunciation probabilities are
estimated from the alignment lattices. Silence probability and
correction factors for preceding silence or non-silence are also
estimated for each variant. These estimates are used to weight
paths through the lexicon FST during subsequent training and
alignment, making more frequent variants preferred.
349
As an optional addition, MFA 3.0 supports the use of
phonological rules to expand the pronunciation dictionary prior
to training, generating additional variants wherever a specified
rule can apply (e.g., flapping or cot-caught merger in American
English). The goal is to more closely model the range of forms
actually produced by speakers. In this case, the pronunciation
probability stages of training additionally serve to prune the ex-
panded dictionary: rule-generated variants that are unattested in
the aligned training data are removed, while the original dictio-
nary entries are retained regardless of attestation.
Our experiments evaluate the impact on performance of
pronunciation probability modeling and phonological rules.
3.2. Model adaptation and remapping
One key feature in MFA 3.0 for improving alignments from pre-
trained models is acoustic model adaptation (mfa adapt). The
pretrained model is first used to align the adaptation dataset,
and the resulting alignments update the acoustic model’s HMM
statistics. Only the means of seen PDFs in the initial alignment
pass are updated, not the variance, which limits the benefits
of adaptation for varieties already well-represented in training
data. For example, adapting MFA’s English models to a data set
containing General American English from adult male speak-
ers results in fewer changes than adapting it to Scottish English
from young children [18]. MFA can also use manual alignments
to guide adaptation more precisely, which can outperform sim-
ply using more data, particularly for cases involving different
speaking styles or speaker ages [54] .
MFA 3.0 has helper commands for remapping phone sets
for dictionaries and alignment files. The dictionary remapping
command (mfa remap dictionary) allows for phone sets of
one dictionary to be remapped to the phone set of a pretrained
model for another language, as has been done for specific lan-
guage pairs [24]. This functionality allows for the user to lever-
age large acoustic models like the Global English MFA model
for languages that do not have enough data to train a dedi-
cated model. The alignment remapping command (mfa remap
alignments) can convert the resulting alignments back to the
original phone set for analysis. The remapping may not be en-
tirely lossless, however, as MFA allows many-to-one style map-
pings, such as representing a diphthong like /aj/ as a sequence
of /a j/ that is supported in the pretrained model.
3.3. Corpus creation and evaluation utilities
MFA 3.0 adds functionality to compare arbitrary alignments for
the purposes of benchmarking. A common evaluation metric for
forced aligners is recall and/or precision from the boundaries in
the reference alignment and boundaries from a given aligner
[21, 47]. A drawback of this method is that the two boundaries
may not be separating the same phones, especially if the phone
sets diverge significantly.
The evaluation algorithm for MFA uses a modified Leven-
shtein algorithm to align the two sets of phone intervals. Edit
distance is a function of matching phone labels along with the
interval’s time points. To mitigate the issue of different rep-
resentations of phones across phone sets, users can specify a
mapping between equivalent phone labels. One-to-many map-
pings are also supported. Boundary error metrics are based on
the aligned intervals.
MFA 3.0 has integrations with specialized libraries for ex-
panded utility to support alignment, particularly with Speech-
Brain [40]. Model hosting has migrated to HuggingFace Hub
allowing for easier distribution and benchmarking of models
with model cards [55] detailing training data and configuration.
The first new utility is for segmenting longer audio files. In
addition to energy-based V AD algorithms, MFA 3.0 can lever-
age V AD models from SpeechBrain to generate segments of
speech. With a pretrained model, dictionary, and transcript,
MFA can iteratively segment the transcript as well. Speaker
diarization capabilities in MFA leverage speaker embeddings
from SpeechBrain to diarize speakers. This is primarily use-
ful for corpora with inconsistent speaker labels rather than as a
general diarization solution (e.g. [38]).
Generating new transcripts from audio files can leverage
WhisperX [39] or SpeechBrain. These transcripts can be used
directly as input to alignment, or checked against original tran-
scripts to discover issues in the data. MFA has the ability to
use pretrained acoustic models, dictionaries and language mod-
els to generate transcripts as well, but modern ASR models like
WhisperX and SpeechBrain have better performance.
Finally, there is support for language-specific tokenization,
for languages that do not typically have spaces between words:
Chinese (spacy-pkuseg: [56]), Japanese (Sudachi: [57]), Ko-
rean (Mecab-ko), and Thai (pythainlp [58]).
3.4. Design and usability
Alignment is typically one step in an analysis pipeline, rather
than an end goal for users, and downstream considerations are
often more important than performance benchmarks. MFA is
designed to be easily installed and used either as standalone
commands or as part of larger p