Feature Design and Generative Modelling in Deep Articulatory Synthesis
Charles McGhee1, Mark J. F . Gales1, Kate M. Knill1
1 ALTA Institute/MIL, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK
cgm43@cam.ac.uk, mjfg@eng.cam.ac.uk, kmk1001@cam.ac.uk
Abstract
A deep articulatory synthesiser learns a mapping from a set of
articulatory features to a set of acoustic features. A growing
use case of articulatory synthesis is as an evaluation method
for articulatory inversion, the process of estimating articulation
from speech. To complete the loop from speech to articula-
tion to speech, information lost during inversion must be added
back in to faithfully recreate the input speech. This information
can be added explicitly via additional input features or implic-
itly through generative modelling. However, by adding this in-
formation back into the synthesis process, the resulting speech
may not be representative of the articulation estimated from in-
version. In this work, we explore the impact of different fea-
ture inputs and modelling types on the output of a synthesiser,
demonstrating that careful design choices are required to make
claims about articulation through synthesis results.
Index Terms: Articulatory Synthesis, Articulatory Inversion,
Explainability
1. Introduction
One of the major challenges with the task of acoustic-to-
articulatory inversion is evaluation at scale. There can be small,
but perceptually salient, differences in the articulatory space,
such as the difference between [æ] and [E], that we need to en-
sure the model can reliably capture across different phonetic
contexts, speakers and recording conditions. Although meth-
ods to automatically analyse synthetic articulatory targets have
been developed [1], articulatory speech synthesis remains one
of the primary methods for analysing the connected output of
an inversion model [2, 3, 4]. Synthesis is useful for fine-grained
analysis, but also allows scalable evaluation through pretrained
Automatic Speech Recognition models (ASR) that can measure
phone or word error rates between the synthetic and original
speech. However, to achieve faithful resynthesis of the orig-
inal speech, it is common to add back any information that
might have been lost through inversion, either explicitly through
additional features or implicitly through generative modelling.
There are several works [1, 4, 2] that report error rates but with
limited analyses into the contribution of different input features
or modelling types to the phonetic output. The main purpose
of this work is to explore how these additional elements inter-
act with the core articulatory feature set to change the synthetic
output.
This research is funded by an EPSRC DTP and the Vice-
Chancellor’s Award. It is supported by Cambridge University Press &
Assessment, a department of The Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of
the University of Cambridge.
2. Background
In this section, we review the topic of articulatory inversion and
the method we use to build a generative model in this paper -
conditional flow matching.
2.1. Articulatory Inversion
Articulatory inversion models learn to regress articulation from
paired speech and articulatory data. Articulation can be mea-
sured using fleshpoint sensor measurements, as in Electromag-
netic Articulography (EMA) or X-Ray Microbeam (XRMB), or
through imaging techniques like ultrasound or Magnetic Reso-
nance Imaging (MRI). The sensor positions or segmented im-
ages are typically estimated from speech using Self-Supervised
Learning (SSL) speech models, such as WavLM [5]. A com-
plete inversion model would be able to recover a specific
speaker’s articulation, including any differences in vocal tract
morphology. However, for many applications (e.g. pronuncia-
tion comparison), it’s preferable that the output articulation is
consistent for speech sounds from the same phonetic category
across different speakers.
In [1], methods were introduced to train articulatory inver-
sion models that produced similar articulatory targets over a
range of speakers. The inversion model was trained on the Wis-
consin XRMB dataset [6], with a fleshpoint articulatory rep-
resentation of the tongue, lips and jaw that contains no infor-
mation about nasal airflow or the presence of voicing. In [7],
a representation of nasality and voicing was created through
PCA of WavLM representations and was combined with the
synthetic articulation from [1] to create an articulatory repre-
sentation that theoretically captured the full range of consonant
sounds present in English. These consistent articulatory repre-
sentations contained no information about intonation or speaker
characteristics. It is expected then, that to synthesise a plausi-
ble reconstruction of the input speech using the combined set
from [1], extra features would need to be added to the input, or
prosodic patterns would need to be learned from data. It is com-
mon in the Text-to-Speech (TTS) community to use generative
modelling techniques to learn prosody from data, so in the next
section, we describe how the same principles could be applied
to articulatory synthesis.
2.2. Generative Modelling
The synthesiser will be trained to generate an acoustic output
xfrom an articulatory inputa. We have extracted a set of
articulatory representations that describe a lot of the underly-
ing phonetic content, but not elements like intonation or global
speaker characteristics. We want to build a generative model
of the acoustic outputq(x), such that the variation in the distri-
5399
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-694
bution captures the natural variation present in the data that is
not present in our articulatory representation. One popular way
in TTS research to build a generative model in this manner is
through the use of Conditional Flow Matching (CFM) [8]. Flow
matching builds a time-dependent probability pathp t(x)0≤t≤1
from a simple source distributionp 0(x) =N(x;0,I)to a dis-
tribution approximating the complex data distributionp 1(x)∼
q(x). A flowϕ: [0,1]×R d→R d is a time-dependent func-
tion that transforms the Euclidean feature space and is defined
in relation to a vector fieldu: [0,1]×R d→R d through this
Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE):
d
dtϕt(x) =u t(ϕt(x))(1)
The velocity fieldut generates the probability pathpt if, for
a samplext∼p t, the flowϕt from the velocity field satisfies:
xt =ϕ t(x0)(2)
wherex 0∼p 0. Solving the ODE in (1) up tot= 1allows us to
sample new points that approximate the data and CFM gives us
a framework to learn a vector field that satisfies the constraints
above. CFM breaks down finding the marginal velocity field
ut(x)into an aggregation of the conditional vector fields con-
ditioned on each data pointu t(x|x1). These conditional vector
fields are constructed by creating simple conditional probability
pathsp t(x|x1)from the sourcep 0 distribution to the targetp 1.
In this work we follow the optimal transport path from [8], that
has a Gaussian conditional probability path:
pt(x|x1) =N(x;µ t(x1),σt(x1)2I)(3)
withµ 0(x1) =0,σ 0(x1) = 1andµ 1(x1) =x 1,σ 1(x1) =
σmin, so at timet= 0the probability is distributed according
to a standard Gaussian and att= 1the variance is small enough
(σmin = 1×10 −4 in our experiments) that the distribution ap-
proximates the data. We then defineµandσto linearly change
with timet:
µt(x1) =tx 1,σt(x1) = 1−(1−σ min)t(4)
This gives a conditional vector field:
ut(x|x1) = x1−(1−σ min)x
1−(1−σ min)t (5)
The final CFM loss for the vector fieldvθ parameterised by
a neural network with parametersθis given as:
L(θ) =E t,(x1,a)∼D,pt(x|x1)||vθ
t (x,a)−u t(x|x1)||2 (6)
wheretis sampled from a uniform densityt∼U[0,1]andDis
the dataset of acoustic and articulatory features. In the follow-
ing section, we give more details on the conditioning articula-
tory featuresaand how they are incorporated into the generative
process.
3. Methodology and Data
3.1. Feature Set
As described in Section 2.1, we use the inversion model from
[1, 7] that outputs 6 2D points representing the tongue (T3-
T1), lips (UL and LL) and jaw (MANi), and the 2D voic-
ing/nasality feature, giving a 14-dimensional representation of
English speech (referred to as ArtVVN). We then experiment
with adding source features in the form of F0 and Short Time
Energy (STE) and a speaker embedding from a pretrained
speaker verification model 1 to these articulatory features. The
1https://huggingface.co/microsoft/wavlm-base-plus-sv
Figure 1:Inference diagrams for baseline synthesiser (Left) and
flow-matching synthesiser (Right).
same F0 and STE extraction methodology is used as in [1], tak-
ing the log of the features and normalising them to vary in the
range of 0 to 1.
We will compare the models we train against the inversion
model and vocoder from [4] - SPARC. SPARC uses unnor-
malised F0 and STE, and a custom speaker embedding. The
speaker embedding in SPARC is derived from WavLM CNN
layers (which are similar to spectral features [9]) and is opti-
mised using the vocoder loss, so it is likely that this embedding
will be more affected by noise in the signal.
3.2. Synthesiser Architecture
In Figure 1, we show the inference pass for the non-generative
and flow-matching synthesisers. We use a cascaded model, pre-
dicting an intermediate mel-spectrogram output before passing
that representation to a pretrained and frozen BigVGAN Base
vocoder [10] to synthesise a waveform. We train one version
of our non-generative synthesiser with the SPARC features de-
scribed above, to compare our cascaded architecture with the
pure vocoder approach proposed in [4]. The backbone for the
non-generative model is the same Conformer-based architecture
from [3, 1].
For the generative model, we borrow the Diffusion Trans-
former (DiT) model from F5-TTS [11]. Similar to [12], we use
a first-order Euler solver at inference, exploring the effect of the
number of steps, or Number of Function Evaluations (NFEs), in
our results. For the flow-matching model, we give the main re-
sults for NFE=2 and a single random seed, as we found limited
phonetic variation for this NFE value with different initialisa-
tions. Articulatory features are concatenated to a noise sample
and fed into the DiT, along with the conditioning inputs of time
(t) and speaker. We keep the baseline parameter count of most
of the synthesisers similar to that of SPARC and [3], with each
backbone having 8 layers and a hidden dimension of 256.
To examine the effect of scaling model capacity, we also
train a larger version of the speaker-conditioned conformer
model with 12 layers and a hidden dimension of 768. Each
model is trained with AdamW [13] and a learning rate of1e−4.
5400
Table 1:Phonetic consistency (PER and MSE), speaker similarity (cosine similarity and speaker verification accuracy) and speech
quality (UTMOS) results for LibriTTS-R test-clean (LS) and the clean (Cln) and noisy (Noi) subsets of [14]. FM - Flow Matching, Spk
- Speaker embedding, Src - Source features.
Phonetic Consistency Speaker Reconstruction Synthesis Quality
PER↓ MSE↓ Cos Sim↑ Spk Acc (%)↑ UTMOS↑
Model Feats LS Cln Noi LS Cln Noi LS Cln Noi LS Cln Noi LS Cln Noi
V ocoder SPARC 8.8 14.0 24.2 0.025 0.028 0.076 0.95 0.92 0.84 100 99 76 4.12 4.04 3.40
Base SPARC 7.6 16.4 29.1 0.009 0.018 0.078 0.950.900.84 100 9965 3.69 3.50 2.75
Base
ArtVVN 8.2 13.7 15.0 0.008 0.012 0.015 0.78 0.70 0.68 58 21 16 3.09 3.03 2.98
+ Spk 8.5 14.0 15.3 0.008 0.012 0.016 0.68 0.68 0.66 34 26 23 3.15 3.08 2.97
+Src +Spk 7.314.1 17.4 0.008 0.014 0.018 0.69 0.69 0.65 64 31 23 3.74 3.30 2.99
Large +Spk 7.412.1 13.5 0.007 0.009 0.012 0.76 0.78 0.78 62 49 49 3.45 3.50 3.38
FM ArtVVN 8.9 14.2 14.9 0.009 0.014 0.016 0.81 0.73 0.73 50 13 11 2.99 2.99 2.92
+Spk 8.2 13.2 14.4 0.008 0.012 0.015 0.69 0.68 0.67 30 24 25 3.27 3.36 3.25
3.3. Data
We will look at the performance of each synthesiser using two
main types of speech data. The first type will be speech data that
is in a similar domain to the training data. The training data for
the base models (Base and FM) is the train-clean-100 subset of
LibriTTS-R [15] and the larger model (Large) is trained on both
train-clean-100 and 360 subsets. We evaluate each model on the
test-clean subset of LibriTTS-R. The baseline, non-generative
synthesiser is trained for 25 epochs on the training set and the
generative synthesiser is trained for 100 epochs to ensure ad-
equate sampling of timesteptfor each data sample. We then
want to test each synthesiser’s capability to synthesise phonet-
ically consistent speech when the source and speaker features
are corrupted. The first dataset we will look at is a parallel cor-
pus of noisy and clean speech from VCTK [14]. We expect
the noisy conditions to significantly alter signal-based source
features like F0 and STE, but leave the WavLM-based articu-
latory and speaker features relatively unchanged. We also look
at how different source and speaker features can affect the out-
put by splicing source and speaker features from one word of a
minimal pair onto the articulatory features of another, using the
minimal pair set dataset from [1].
3.4. Evaluation
The main evaluation criteria for each synthesiser are based on
how well they recreate the phonetic content encoded in the input
articulation. To this end, we use Phone Error Rate (PER) from
an off-the-shelf phone recognition model 2 and articulatory re-
construction error, measured between the original and resynthe-
sised speech. Correlation on reconstructed articulation was typ-
ically very high (greater than 0.99) for the non-SPARC models,
so we found that Mean Squared Error (MSE) more clearly il-
lustrated differences between each synthesiser. We have found
that training a non-generative synthesiser on only articulatory
features produces a blurry mel-spectrogram output that, when
passed through a pretrained vocoder, sounds very robotic (see
samples3 for the baseline model). To get a sense of whether a
model is producing any unnatural effects like this, we use UT-
MOS [16]. The final element we’re interested in is whether
the speaker characteristics of the output synthesis match the
speaker embedding input. We use two speaker verification mod-
els to validate the speaker characteristics of the output. The
first model is the same speaker embedding input model used
2https://huggingface.co/facebook/wav2vec2-xlsr-53-espeak-cv-ft
3https://artsynth.github.io/
before and we measure cosine similarity between the input em-
bedding and the embedding predicted on the output utterance.
The second is an ECAPA-TDNN speaker verification model 4
from which we report speaker verification accuracy, assuming
both input and resynthesised speech are from the same speaker.
4. Results
4.1. Phonetic Consistency
In Table 1, we give the PER and MSE for resynthesis on the
LibriTTS-R test-clean subset and the clean and noisy condi-
tions from [14]. Reconstruction MSE on test-clean was com-
parable between cascaded models trained with and without
source/speaker features; however, PER was significantly lower
for models trained with source features. The flow-matching
models also matched their non-generative counterparts in terms
of phonetic consistency (at least at this lower NFE value - see
the next section). All models performed slightly worse when
considering the noisy conditions from [14] versus the clean con-
ditions; however, those models that used additional (normalised
or unnormalised) source features had much higher PER/MSE
differences than those trained without source features. This
would indicate that models trained with these source features
end up relying on them to reconstruct the phonetic content
of speech, especially with small models in low-data scenar-
ios. Increasing model capacity and data (as with the ‘Large’
cascaded model) can achieve comparable results to using ad-
ditional source features in terms of phonetic reconstruction.
It is likely that our choice of speaker embedding (WavLM-
based) also resulted in less phonetic content loss between noisy
and clean audio, as opposed to the SPARC speaker embedding
trained for better synthesis quality. This embedding, in addi-
tion to the unnormalised source features, may explain the large
difference in PER/MSE for the SPARC-trained models on the
clean/noisy subsets from [14].
The vocoder model had worse phonetic reconstruction met-
rics on in-domain data than the cascaded base model and worse
MSE on clean data from [14]. Given that the cascaded base
model was trained on a fraction of the data used to train the
vocoder model (train-clean-100 vs the full LibriTTS-R training
set), scaling up the training data/size of the model would likely
have resulted in better out-of-domain performance, as was the
case with the larger cascaded model. These poor phonetic re-
construction metrics and long training times make the vocoder
4https://huggingface.co/speechbrain/spkrec-ecapa-voxceleb
5401
architecture unsuitable for quickly and robustly assessing the
quality of synthetic articulatory representations.
4.2. Speaker Reconstruction and Synthesis Quality
An area where the vocoder architecture seems to shine is
speaker reconstruction and synthesis quality, achieving higher
speaker embedding cosine similarity, speaker verification accu-
racy and UTMOS across in-domain and clean out-of-domain
data. However, we do still observe a sharp drop in these met-
rics between the clean and noisy conditions in [14]. This drop
was not present in the Large cascaded model with speaker-
embedding input, but was very apparent in cascaded models
with source-feature input. The additional speaker embedding
seemed to actively harm reconstruction cosine similarity in the
base cascaded and flow-matching models for the LibriTTS-R
set, but had slightly higher speaker verification accuracy when
looking at the clean/noisy subsets of [14]. This indicates that the
train-clean-100 subset and model capacity of the base synthe-
sisers was insufficient to produce generalisable speaker transfer
using only the WavLM-based speaker embedding.
4.3. Number of Function Evaluations
In Figure 2, we plot PER and UTMOS for the flow-matching
synthesiser with speaker conditioning on the clean data from
[14] for different NFE values. For smaller NFE values, the pho-
netic distortion is lowest, with samples sounding similar to the
baseline model. As the NFE increases, so does PER, but also
UTMOS, with UTMOS performance levelling out as NFE ap-
proaches 10. The result for UTMOS is very similar to that seen
in diffusion-based TTS models [17], where NFE values greater
than 10 resulted in only small improvements to MOS.
Figure 2:PER and UTMOS values for the flow-matching syn-
thesiser with different Number of Function Evaluations (NFE)
on the clean data from [14]
4.4. Feature Substitution
For each minimal pair set in the US English set from [1], we
resynthesise each word with substituted source and speaker fea-
tures from every other word, interpolating the source features
to match the length of the original articulatory features. We
then re-estimate the articulation for each resynthesised word
and compare it against the articulatory features for every word
in the minimal pair set using Dynamic Time Warping (DTW)
alignment. If the reconstructed articulatory features best match
the input word’s articulatory features, we mark it as correct;
otherwise, we mark it as incorrect. In Table 2, we give the re-
sulting accuracies from this method for the baseline model with
additional source/speaker features.
Table 2:Vowel and consonant accuracies with different feature
sets substitutions.
None Spk Src Spk+Src
V owels91.7 90.7 91.3 90.4
Consonants84.9 84.2 75.3 75.2
We find that swapping the speaker embedding produces a
bigger reduction in accuracy for the vowel set, whereas the
source features had a larger effect on the accuracy of conso-
nants, although the overall reduction for consonants is much
larger than vowels. In Figures 3 and 4, we show that the swap-
ping of source/speaker features doesn’t just emphasise existing
errors, but raises new errors, including errors with large articu-
latory differences e.g. confusing /E/ with /u/ and /b/ with /n/.
Figure 3:Smoothed log counts of substitution errors for vow-
els synthesised without swapping source/speaker features (Left)
and after swapping source/speaker features (Right)
Figure 4:Smoothed log counts of substitution errors for con-
sonants synthesised without swapping source/speaker features
(Left) and after swapping source/speaker features (Right)
5. Conclusion
In this work, we’ve demonstrated that additional speaker and
particularly source features can distort the phonetic content of
articulatory synthesis. We have also shown that flow-matching
synthesisers can have similar phonetic consistency to more stan-
dard models and this consistency can be sacrificed for better
synthesis quality by increasing the NFE. Future work will look
to scale up these flow-matching models to see whether it is pos-
sible to achieve comparable UTMOS and speaker reconstruc-
tion to vocoder-only models.
5402
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
AI was used to generate the template HTML/CSS for the sam-
ples page.