Speech Playground: An Interactive Tool for Speech Analysis and Comparison
Stephen McIntosh ID 1, Daisuke Saito ID 1, Nobuaki Minematsu ID 1
1 The University of Tokyo, Japan
{smcintosh,mine}@gavo.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
This paper presents Speech Playground, an interactive speech
visualization and comparison tool. While existing tools such
as Praat are excellent, it can be cumbersome to integrate them
with modern deep learning representations and use them for
comparison. Speech Playground addresses this by combining
a Python backend with a web-based frontend for interactive ex-
ploration of multiple feature types, including continuous, dis-
crete, and variable-length representations. It includes TextGrid
and forced alignment support together with configurable dis-
tance and alignment settings for visual and auditory compar-
ison. Speech Playground is intended for use in speech re-
search, representation validation, and computer-aided pronun-
ciation training (CAPT)-oriented experimentation.
Index Terms: speech analysis, utterance comparison, CAPT
1. Introduction
Interactive tools for speech analysis such as Praat are widely
used in speech research and are also useful for speech feedback
in CAPT settings. However, recent deep-learning-based speech
research has produced many different representations such as
self-supervised or articulatory features. Comparing these re-
quires Python-based encoders, alignment code, and ad-hoc vi-
sualization scripts, which is cumbersome.
In this paper, we present Speech Playground1, an extensible
interactive tool for visualization of speech features and utter-
ance comparison. Speech Playground has two modes:Analysis
for single-track visualization (Figure 1) andDiff(Figure 2) for
utterance comparison.
Speech Playground provides a single interactive environ-
ment in which users can compare speech encoders, continu-
ous, discrete, and variable-length representations, and alterna-
tive distance and alignment settings on the same utterance pair.
We envision the following use cases: (1)Speech researchus-
ing speech features unavailable in other tools and Diff mode to
explain variation in speech with respect to a reference; (2)Rep-
resentation validationby checking whether a representation
captures a specific contrast or behaves consistently with the au-
dio; and (3)CAPT-oriented experimentationusing Diff mode
to show where and how model speech and learner speech are
different.
2. Overview
2.1. Architecture
Speech Playground comprises three components:
1https://github.com/stephenmac7/
speech-playground
Figure 1:Sample viewerwith TextGrid annotation and phono-
logical vector tiers [1]. Positive and negative activations are
shaded purple and orange, respectively.
Thefrontendis a SvelteKit application that provides two
primary modes:Analysis, for examining a single utterance, and
Diff, for aligning and comparing two utterances. WaveSurfer.js
is used for waveform visualization. IndexedDB is used to man-
age and persist uploaded recordings and metadata such as tran-
scription and TextGrid files.
Thebackendis a FastAPI (Python) server exposing speech
processing endpoints including encoding, segmentation, and
alignment, lazily loading models on demand for fast startup and
iteration.
Thespeech-processing libraryprovides a uniform in-
terface over feature extractors, calledencoders. Each en-
coder maps waveforms to a sequence of continuous frame-
or segment-level representations. Built-in encoders include
SSL, articulatory, phonological-feature, and segmental repre-
sentations, including SSL-derived variable-length representa-
tions such as ZeroSyl [2]. Representations can optionally be
transformed into discrete units or grouped into coarser variable-
length segments.
The speech-processing library also includes functions for
comparing utterances (used inDiffmode). It includes func-
tions that compute similarity matrices between utterances and
perform discrete or segment-based alignments, producing diffs
with insertions, deletions, and substitutions. Users can switch
between distance measures and alignment settings, including
global and semi-global matching. For fixed-rate representa-
tions, Speech Playground defaults to dynamic time warping
(DTW) viadtw-python 2; variable-length segmental repre-
sentations and discrete tokenizations can be compared with al-
ternative alignment methods.
2https://dynamictimewarping.github.io/python/
5918
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia

Figure 2:The full UIinDiffmode. The top tier in theQuery 1 shows the frame-wise DTW distance to theModel(higher distances
in red). The blue tiers 2 shown on theModelrepresent TextGrid tiers and are available for samples in the library with an attached
TextGrid file (indicated by a green TG button). The green tiers 3 shown on theQueryare a forced alignment using the optional MFA
service. The user is currently recording new audio for the last “One wonders about its applicability to people” sample 4 (recording
progress shown at 5 ).
2.2. Components
Figure 2 shows the full UI. It consists of a mode selector at the
top right, alibraryin a sidebar on the right, and a main area on
the left containingsample viewer(s)andconfiguration.
Thelibrarymanages recordings and metadata (tracks), in-
cluding transcripts and TextGrid files. Selected tracks are visu-
alized in one or moresample viewers, which display the wave-
form together with interval tiers such as annotations, encoder-
derived segments, or phonological features. For tracks with
transcripts, the viewer can also request a forced alignment3. The
sample viewer is interactive: it can be zoomed and scrolled, and
users can listen to segments of the audio by dragging over the
waveform or intervals. InDiffmode, holdingShiftwhile se-
lecting an area to play will play the corresponding audio in the
othertrack’s sample viewer.
2.3. Workflow
Selected track(s) are encoded and compared (when in Diff
mode) according to the selected configuration whenever either
changes, allowing users to interactively switch encoders, dis-
cretization settings, distance measures, and alignment modes
while exploring the results. Beyond locating mismatches, the
aligned phonological and articulatory views can help users in-
terpret how two utterances are different. For example, Figure 3
shows articulatory inversion features aligned at a single frame,
allowing direct inspection of estimated articulator differences
between the two utterances.
3. Conclusion
Speech Playground is an interactive tool for analyzing and com-
paring speech. Its extensible design makes it easy to com-
pare different speech representations and processing strategies
3Forced alignment requires an additional backend server:
https://github.com/stephenmac7/mfa-service
Figure 3:Articulatory inversionfeatures [3] in Diff mode at a
single frame. Animated when a sample plays.
within a single interface, making it useful for speech research,
representation validation, and CAPT-oriented experimentation.
4. Generative AI Use Disclosure
LLMs were used for coding assistance and final proofreading.
5. References
[1] K. Choi, E. Yeo, C. J. Cho, D. Harwath, and D. R. Mortensen,
“[b]=[d]-[t]+[p]: Self-supervised Speech Models Discover Phono-
logical Vector Arithmetic,” inFindings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: ACL 2026, Jul. 2026.
[2] N. Visser, S. Malan, D. Slabbert, and H. Kamper, “ZeroSyl: Simple
Zero-Resource Syllable Tokenization for Spoken Language Mod-
eling,” https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15537v1, Feb. 2026.
[3] C. McGhee, M. J. F. Gales, and K. M. Knill, “Training Articula-
tory Inversion Models for Interspeaker Consistency,” inProc. In-
terspeech 2025, 2025, pp. 5583–5587.
5919