AURORA: A Web-based Authoring System for Bridging Aural–Oral
Language Training and Communicative Practice
Nobuaki Minematsu ID
Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo
mine@gavo.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
AURORA is a web-based authoring system for designing and
deploying aural–oral training and communicative practice. For
aural training, shadowing and its variants were implemented,
and listening disfluency (LD) was measured and visualized. For
oral training, imitative overlapping and its variants were used to
quantify pronunciation deviations (PD) in learners’ speech. For
communicative practice, learners engaged in task-based oral
conversations with ChatGPT, followed by prompt-based auto-
matic assessment. With AURORA, two-month, inter-semester
courseware was provided, where learners practiced for about 30
minutes per day to improve their listening, speaking, and com-
municative skills. This courseware supported university stu-
dents during the transition to English-medium instruction, as
more courses are offered in English. Training outcomes were
evaluated objectively using LD and PD and subjectively through
questionnaires. A tutorial workshop on AURORA was held for
teachers in February.
Index Terms: authoring system, CALL, aural and oral training,
communicative practice, automatic assessment and feedback
1. Introduction
In many educational settings, foreign languages are taught in
the classroom, and teachers often hope that learners will con-
tinue using the language outside class. In practice, however,
learners often have limited chances to engage in real conversa-
tions in the target language. One possible solution is the use
of CALL (Computer-Assisted Language Learning) systems, al-
lowing learners to engage in aural and oral language activities
anytime and anywhere. However, many teachers cannot de-
velop CALL systems by themselves, even when they have spe-
cific task ideas well adapted to the needs of their own learners.
To address this problem, AURORA was developed as a
web-based authoring system that enables teachers to create their
own speech drills for aural–oral training [1] and communica-
tive practice. The name of AURORA is derived from “aural”
and “oral,” reflecting the system’s aim to bridge listening- and
speaking-oriented training with communicative practice. The
system was developed from the dual perspective of speech engi-
neering and language education: the author teaches speech tech-
nology as a speech engineer and also teaches English as a lan-
guage instructor. The author’s institution, the Graduate School
of Engineering at The University of Tokyo, began pedagogi-
cal preparation for English-medium instruction (EMI) in 2024
and started offering graduate courses in English in April 2026.
To support students in this significant transition, AURORA was
designed so that it can provide an online training environment
while remaining generalizable for use by other instructors.
Using AURORA, two-month, inter-semester, on-demand
Presented audio
Learner’s shadowing
Listening disﬂuency curve
Averaged disﬂuency curve
Figure 1:Visualization of listening disfluency
courseware was developed and deployed for undergraduates. In
this courseware, students practiced for about 30 minutes per day
to improve their listening, speaking, and communicative skills.
The courseware supports: 1) listening practice with General
American (GA), Received Pronunciation (RP), and World En-
glishes; 2) pronunciation training aimed at improving the com-
prehensibility of learners’ speech; and 3) conversational prac-
tice in practical contexts. We reported the effectiveness of this
courseware at domestic meetings on language education. In re-
sponse to requests from language teachers and speech scientists,
a tutorial workshop on AURORA was held in February 2026.
2. Features of AURORA
Besides fundamental functions such as 1) registering classes,
learners, audio and video materials used for the courseware, and
2) logging learners’ activities, AURORA provides features for
designing speech drills with the following three aims.
2.1. Aural training
One of the most important skills for students in EMI is listening.
Effective listening requires knowledge of syntax, vocabulary,
and pronunciation, and students generally recognize this fact
well. In AURORA, we focus on other aspects of listening that
students may overlook without explicit instruction.
First, speech is transient, unlike written text, which remains
visible on the page. Learners therefore need to be trained to
temporarily retain incoming speech. To support learners in this
aspect, AURORA provides memory-oriented activities such as
shadowing, delayed repetition, retelling, and summarizing, in-
tegrated with speech technologies and ChatGPT. As feedback,
listening disfluency (LD) and comprehension disfluency are au-
tomatically detected and visualized, as shown in Figure 1. In
practice, LD was calculated as shadowing disfluency by com-
paring a shadowing recording and its reference text-shadowing
recording using DTW. Learners can compare their own listening
2378
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia

Presented model audio
Syl. prominence (model and learner)
ASR transcript of overlapping with error correction
Pitch contour (model and learner)
ASR score for each word
Averaged scores Binary representation
for the learner’s words
Figure 2:Visualization of overlapping performance
performance along with a given audio with the average perfor-
mance over all participants (See Figure 1).
Second, in spontaneous speech, it is often difficult to iden-
tify each word separately. AURORA therefore encourages
learners to process input speech in meaningful chunks. For this
support, phrase-by-phrase repetition and phrase-based overlap-
ping are used. Although the latter is primarily an oral-training
activity, it helps learners capture input speech phrase by phrase.
Third, speech varies acoustically depending on the speaker,
speaking style, accent, and environment. Further, the phonetic
realization of segments near word boundaries often changes in
connected speech. To address these issues, AURORA supports
high-variability phonetic/shadowing training [2], and imitation
training for connected speech. The last of these also functions
as oral training, as in the overlapping task described above. For
high-variability training, teachers often collect diverse speech
samples manually. In AURORA, however, voice conversion
techniques can convert a single speech sample into more than
100 acoustic variants while preserving its linguistic content.
2.2. Oral training
Although some learners may aim for native-like pronunciation,
many teachers agree that accented pronunciation is acceptable
as long as it remains sufficiently intelligible and comprehensible
to general listeners. In line with this view, AURORA focuses
primarily on comprehensibility. It analyzes prosodic deviations
in learners’ speech, especially those related to rhythm and into-
nation, and also detects segmental deviations as ASR errors.
Overlapping training with immediate visualization of
prosodic gaps [1], shown in Figure 2, encourages learners to
follow the model speech in terms of duration, syllable promi-
nence, and intonation control, which are reported to be corre-
lated with speech comprehensibility [3]. As for segmental de-
viations, learners generally cannot determine whether the ASR
errors are due to technical errors, i.e., machine errors, or produc-
tion errors, i.e., human errors. To address this issue, AURORA
shows the average ASR rate for each word, calculated over all
participants (See Figure 2). If a word in a learner’s speech is
incorrectly recognized even though the average ASR score for
that word is high, the error is likely to be due to a production er-
ror. Conversely, if the average score is extremely low, the error
is likely to be due to technical limitations of ASR. Overlapping
tasks can be repeated as many times as learners wish. Repetition
with feedback can gradually change their speaking behaviors.
2.3. Communicative practice
Using ChatGPT’s advanced voice mode and carefully designed
prompts, learners engage in task-based interactive conversa-
tions with ChatGPT. The following customized GPTs are pro-
vided: 1) a guessing game, 2) a story recall game, 3) a lie-
detection game, 4) topic-based discussion, and 5) interviewing
a TED speaker. 1) and 5) are explained in more detail below.
During conversations, learners may fail to recall specific
words or expressions and may remain silent. To handle such sit-
uations, rephrasing skills are important. In the guessing game,
ChatGPT acts as the guesser, and learners describe a target ex-
pression without using it directly. Through this activity, learners
can enjoy the game while improving their rephrasing skills.
In the TED-speaker interview task, after a learner listens to
a selected TED talk and its transcript is uploaded to ChatGPT,
ChatGPT plays the role of the speaker. The learner interviews
the speaker and discusses the topics presented in the talk.
In each of the five tasks, after each conversation, ChatGPT
is given an evaluation prompt and assesses the learner’s con-
versational performance based solely on the ASR transcript. In
addition, learners’ recordings are converted into phonetic pos-
teriorgrams, from which confusing phoneme pairs are automat-
ically detected. The detected pairs are provided to the learner as
a summary of their pronunciation habits.
3. On-Demand Courseware Developed and
Deployed Using AURORA
3.1. Overview of the courseware
AURORA was used to provide two-month, inter-semester, on-
demand courseware in which learners practiced for about 30
minutes per day to improve their listening, speaking, and com-
municative skills [2]. The courseware, called Special Training
for English Academic Communication (STEAC), consisted of
eight weekly training programs. Each program had its own goal,
which was explained on Monday through its YouTube video,
with special emphasis on why the goal was important. Since the
training from Tuesday to Sunday consisted of repeated sessions
of the same task, it was important to keep learners sufficiently
motivated to complete all the sessions.
3.2. Observations from the courseware
In the 2025 academic year, 832 learners registered for the sum-
mer and spring STEAC courses. Pre- and post-tests for the sum-
mer course showed that LD and PD were significantly reduced
[2], and the reduction in LD was particularly noticeable to learn-
ers. After the summer course, questionnaires with open-ended
questions were administered. A summary of the free comments
is available athttps://bit.ly/4nbE6Jf. Overall, the
comments were highly positive.
Use of generative AI disclosure:Generative AI tools were
used only for proofreading and language polishing.
4. References
[1] N. Minematsu, N. Nakanishi, Y . Gao, and H. Sun, “A Unified
Framework to Improve Learners’ Skills of Perception and Produc-
tion Based on Speech Shadowing and Overlapping,” inProc. Inter-
speech, 2023, pp. 3667–3668.
[2] N. Minematsu, “Training Ears and Tongues with AI: Scalable and
Customizable English Courseware for the EMI Transition,” inAb-
stract book of the Pronunciation in Second Language Learning and
Teaching Conference, 2025.
[3] J. Sugimoto and Y . Uchida, “English Phonetics and Teacher Train-
ing: Designing a Phonetics Course for Japanese Preservice Teach-
ers,”J. Phonetic Society of Japan, vol. 24, pp. 22–35, 2020.
2379