Evaluating Automatic Laughter Phone Annotation for Socially-Situated
Laughter Synthesis
Hiroki Mori ID 1,∗∗, Hiroto Ueda1
1 Utsunomiya University, Japan
hiroki@speech-lab.org, ueda@speech-lab.org
Abstract
Laughter synthesis remains underdeveloped in current conver-
sational agent technologies. Laughter appears in diverse forms
reﬂecting individuality, emotion, and social context. To model
this diversity and generating appropriate laughter, annotating
laughter phones is crucial, but it involves an immense work-
load. This study evaluates automatic laughter phone annota-
tion for conversational laughter synthesis. Using a newly an-
notated eleven-speaker dataset, we built an improved laughter
phone recognizer and constructed two laughter synthesizers, a
statistical parametric speech synthesis (SPSS)-based model and
an audio-LLM-based model, using manual and automatic phone
labels. Listening tests showed that the audio-LLM-based syn-
thesizer achieved higher naturalness, whereas the SPSS-based
synthesizer achieved higher reproducibility of the way of laugh-
ing, and that systems built with automatic labels did not match
the performance of those using manual labels.
Index Terms: laughter synthesis, laughter phone recognition
1. Introduction
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have signiﬁ-
cantly improved the conversational abilities of machines. How-
ever, they not fully cover various phenomena observed in spo-
ken communication. The nonverbal aspects of speech remain
underexplored even in the latest LLM research.
In particular, modeling nonverbal emotional expressions,
including laughter, is an important yet still immature area in
conversational agent technologies. Laughter can exhibit diverse
forms, which are related to individuality [ 1], emotion percep-
tion [2], emotional effects on interlocutors [ 3], and social con-
texts [ 4, 5, 6]. However, determining the laughter forms that
reﬂect such various factors is a research challenge; even in re-
cent studies on eliciting shared laughter by robots[ 7], a simple
selection from a small pool of laughter samples was used.
Mori and Kimura [ 1] proposed a two-stage laughter syn-
thesis method that enables generating diverse laughter forms
depending on emotional states at both the laughter phone level
(e.g. hu ha ha) and the acoustic level. The former phone gen-
erator is essentially a language model, while the latter laugh-
ter sound synthesizer is based on the framework of statisti-
cal parametric speech synthesis (SPSS). A major bottleneck of
this laughter synthesis was its reliance on a conversational cor-
pus with manually provided phonetic annotation of laughs; the
study used a laughter dataset with only two speakers, as man-
ual laughter annotation typically requires expertise in laugh-
ter structure and involves an immense workload. If automatic
annotation of conversational laughter becomes available, one
**indicates the corresponding author.
could model diverse laughter forms depending on context using
large-scale conversational corpora recorded in various conver-
sation situations.
Thus, automatic annotation of laughter phones is a promis-
ing direction to realize the synthesis of socially situated laughter
in diverse forms. A recent study [ 8] investigated laughter phone
recognition based on a large-scale pre-trained speech model, re-
porting a phone boundary error (PBE) of 16.8 ms and and a
phone substitution error of 24.5% for seen speakers, and a PBE
of 34.9 ms and a phone substitution error of 46.3% for unseen
speakers. However, the amount of fully annotated laughter data
for model training was limited, leaving the generalization to un-
seen speakers underexplored. In addition, the effects of these
errors on the quality of synthesized laughter were not investi-
gated.
The goal of the present study is to evaluate automatic
laughter phone annotation from the viewpoint of conversational
laughter synthesis. First, a speaker-independent laughter phone
recognition model is built using a newly developed eleven-
speaker laughter dataset. Its accuracy is evaluated on a test
set including both seen and unseen speakers, and the effect of
recognition accuracy on synthesis quality is examined. Second,
laughter sound synthesis models are built using automatically
annotated laughter phones, and their performance is compared
with models built on manually annotated laughter phones.
Meanwhile, recent speech synthesis technologies are
rapidly shifting toward LLM-based approaches, where a speech
signal is regarded as a sequence of tokens in the same manner
as word tokens. This framework eliminates the grapheme-to-
phoneme conversion required in traditional text-to-speech mod-
els. This leads to the hypothesis that laughter phone annotation
may not be necessary at all—or that not-so-accurate annota-
tion may be sufﬁcient—when building laughter sound synthe-
sizers based on speech-aware LLMs. Therefore, the goal of the
present study also includes clarifying whether laughter phone
annotation is useful not only for SPSS-based laughter synthe-
sis, which explicitly leverages laughter phone annotation, but
also for laughter sound synthesis based on audio LLMs.
2. Laughter Dataset and Annotation
2.1. Conversation Corpora
To model the diversity of socially situated laughter, it is essen-
tial to collect laughter that occurs naturally in conversation. In
this study, the Action Gameplay Social Communication corpus
(AGSC) [9] and the Online Gaming V oice chat Corpus (OGVC)
[10] are adopted to build our laughter dataset. Both corpora
contain a large number of laughs that spontaneously occurred
during gameplay conversations, and they have been used in pre-
vious laughter synthesis studies [ 1, 2, 11, 12, 13].
6456
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2141
Table 1: Train and test set for laughter phone recognition. #:
The number of laughter episodes. The test set was used also for
training the laughter sound synthesizer .
train test
sex speaker # speaker #
AGSC
male G001R 150 G001R 38
G010R 136
female
G003R 150 G003R 39
G004L 171 G004L 44
G008L 143 G008L 37
G008R 144 G008R 38
G004R 159
OGVC
male 04 MNN 131 04 MNN 33
04 MSY 256
female 06 FTY 283 06 FTY 71
06 FW A 226
2.2. Laughter Phone Annotation
In the terminology of [ 14], a laughter episode refers to a se-
ries of acoustic events corresponding to exhalation or inhala-
tion, and a call refers to an individual unit of laughter, analo-
gous to a syllable. We regard either a call or a single inhalation
as a synthesis unit, and refer to each component as a phone.
For this study, the ﬁrst and second author annotated calls
and inhalations for eleven speakers in total—four from OGVC
and seven from AGSC. Based on these annotations, we con-
structed the laughter dataset and split it into train set and test set.
The speaker IDs and the number of annotated laughter episodes
for each set are shown in Table 1.
The transcribing system followed previous work [ 8]: The
consonant and vowel of each call were transcribed using the ro-
manization of Japanese syllables; the laughter vowels were thus
classiﬁed as one of a, e, i, u, or o. Individual inhalation sounds
were also identiﬁed as h (unvoiced) or H (voiced). Phonetic
variants including unvoiced (e.g., hu
˚
), nasal (e.g., h ˜u), and con-
sonant prolongation (e.g., h :u) were also labelled as auxiliary
features.
3. Laughter Phone Recognition
We employed a laughter phone recognition system based on
a large-scale pre-trained model, speciﬁcally the framewise+d
method [ 8]. The model is basically a frame-level 39-class CV
(consonant-vowel) classiﬁer with three binary auxiliary fea-
ture recognizers built on top of XLSR-53 large, a wav2vec
2.0 model. In the training phase, the reference label for the
ﬁnal frame of each phone is replaced with a blank symbol,
which allows the model to detect phone boundary frames. Be-
cause this occasionally produces extremely short phone seg-
ments, a postprocessing step using a phone duration model is
applied. The optimal alignment that maximizes the joint prob-
ability of phone-level posteriors and phone duration probability
is searched dynamically.
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate examples of recognized laughter
phones. Compared with the ground truth, the results are gen-
erally accurate, though several substitutions and deletions are
observed.
Table 2 shows the accuracy for the test set. For unseen
speakers, the model achieves a phone boundary error (PBE
[15]) of 23.0 ms, a substitution error of 30%, a deletion error
of 14%, an insertion error of 7%, and an auxiliary feature error
of 15%. These results represent a substantial improvement over
Figure 1: Example of phone recognition for an unseen speaker
G010R.
Figure 2: Example of phone recognition for an unseen speaker
06 FWA.
Table 2: Accuracy of laughter phone recognition, trained and
tested using the sets in Table 1. The unit of PBE is ms.
CV aux. feat.
PBE subst. del. ins. error
seen speakers 23.7 0.30 0.12 0.14 0.12
unseen speakers 23.0 0.30 0.14 0.07 0.15
[8], where the corresponding error were 34.9 ms, 46%, 13%,
15%, and 28%, respectively. They also approach the best re-
sults reported in [ 8] for seen speakers (16.8 ms, 25%, 9%, 8%,
8%).
Nevertheless, a substitution error of 30% may be consid-
ered relatively high. This mainly arises from the intrinsic pho-
netic ambiguity of laughter sounds [ 16, 17, 18]. From the per-
spective of laughter synthesis, however, a modest reduction in
phonetic recognition accuracy may have little effect on the qual-
ity or form of the synthesized laughter, given the intrinsic am-
biguity of laughter. In the following sections, we examine the
inﬂuence of the precision of automatic laughter phone annota-
tion on laughter synthesis.
4. Laughter Sound Synthesis
Generally, laughter synthesis can be divided into two parts: (i)
generation of laughter components, such as calls or (pseudo-)
phonemes [ 1, 19, 20], and (ii) generation of laughter sounds
given such components. In this paper, we will focus primar-
ily on the second part; that is, the laughter components to be
synthesized are assumed to be known, while also constructing a
phone recognizer as a prerequisite for this setting.
4.1. SPSS-Based Synthesizer
Many laughter synthesis studies [ 12, 20] have regarded their
systems as extensions of text-to-speech, treating laughter com-
ponents as phonemes. However, modern end-to-end speech
6457
models require a large amount of speech data for training, mak-
ing their direct application to laughter synthesis difﬁcult.
In the current study, we employ the laughter sound syn-
thesizer proposed by Mori and Kimura [ 1]. This system is es-
sentially a vocoder-based statistical parametric speech synthesis
(SPSS) model [ 21], which tends to model human vocalization
better than end-to-end approaches when the amount of available
data is limited.
For duration modeling, the input feature set consisted of the
identity of current CV (39), three phonetic variations (voiced-
ness, nasality, consonant prolongation) and their left and right
context (×3), phone position (1), and laughter length (1), result-
ing in a total of 128 features. Speaker identity was appended
as a one-hot vector. The input for emotion dimensions was dis-
abled in the current study.
For acoustic modeling, phone duration and three numer-
ical features representing coarse-coded frame position within
the current phone [22] were added to the input. The output con-
sisted of 59th-order Mel-cepstrum, log fo, aperiodicity, their ∆,
∆∆, and voicedness.
The network architecture comprised a three-layer stacked
bidirectional LSTM with 128 hidden units, followed by a linear
output layer.
4.2. Fish-Speech
Fish-Speech [ 23] is a neural audio generation framework that
employs a fast-slow autoregressive architecture to achieve high-
ﬁdelity, multilingual, zero-shot text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis.
The Slow Transformer autoregressively models global linguis-
tic structures and semantic content—functioning effectively as
an LLM—and generates intermediate tokens that encode mean-
ing and prosody. The Fast Transformer then autoregressively
reﬁnes the Slow Transformer’s outputs to capture more detailed
acoustic characteristics of natural speech.
In this framework, both target speaker characteristics and
speaking style are provided as audio prompts along with their
transcriptions, enabling the model to generalize to unseen
speakers and expressive contexts without ﬁne-tuning. To gen-
erate laughter with Fish-Speech, a small number of laughter
samples from the target speaker are supplied as prompts, and
a phone sequence of the target laughter (or even a simple LoL
symbol) is given as the input text.
4.3. Inﬂuence of Laughter Phone Annotation on the Laugh-
ter Sound Synthesis
Although the accuracy of laughter phone annotation is expected
to be crucial for SPSS-based laughter sound synthesis, the ex-
tent of the negative effect of inaccurate annotation remains un-
known. If the quality of the laughter synthesized by the model
trained with the automatic annotation described in the previous
section does not show a perceptible difference, it can be con-
cluded that automatic annotation is useful for laughter synthe-
sis.
For the laughter synthesis with Fish-Speech, the laughter
dataset can be used as prompts rather than for model train-
ing. Because the pre-trained model does not encode knowledge
of the phonetic transcription of laughter sounds, our interest
here is whether Fish-Speech can learn the phonetic structure of
laughter in a zero-shot manner. In addition, Fish-Speech should
be able to produce natural laughter without any supervision of
phone sequences. Given that, whether prompting with a laugh-
ter dataset improves the laughter synthesis is also intriguing.
Below are the research questions addressed in this paper:
RQ1 Do laughter phone labels improve synthesized laughter
from the viewpoints of naturalness, way of laughing, and
speaker individuality?
RQ2 Are automatically generated laughter phone labels sufﬁ-
cient to train the SPSS-based laughter sound synthesizer (or
to prompt Fish-Speech), from the viewpoints of naturalness,
way of laughing, and speaker individuality?
RQ3 Which model (SPSS-based synthesizer vs. Fish-Speech)
is superior, from the viewpoints of naturalness, way of laugh-
ing, and speaker individuality?
5. Laughter Synthesis Experiment
5.1. Data and Models
Target speakers in the laughter synthesis experiment were
G010R, G004R, 04 MSY , and 06FW A. The data used for train-
ing the SPSS-based model or for prompting Fish-Speech was
the same subset of the test set shown in Table 1, comprising the
four unseen speakers.
For Fish-Speech, we used the pre-trained FishAudio S1
model, which was trained on more than two million hours of
audio data in multiple languages.
We assessed the following four model training/prompting
conditions:
ManualLabel Using manually annotated phone labels
(Sect. 2.2) for training or prompting.
AutoLabel Using automatically annotated phone labels
(Sect. 3) for training or prompting.
AutoLabel+ Same as AutoLabel, but the training data was ex-
panded with laughter sounds of an additional 29 speakers
from AGSC and UUDB (another conversation corpus [ 24]).
This condition is applicable only to SPSS-based model.
NoLabel No phone-level annotation: a single LoL symbol was
used as the phonetic transcription for the SPSS-based model,
and ( স) (LoL in Japanese) was used as the input text for
Fish-Speech.
The prompt fed into Fish-Speech was limited to 30 episodes to
avoid extremely long prompts.
Audio samples are available at https://www.
speech-lab.org/hiroki/IS2026/.
5.2. Listening Test
Input phone sequences to the synthesizer were randomly se-
lected from actual instances of the four speakers’ laughter,
rather than sampled by phone sequence models [ 1]. Ten phone
sequences per speaker were chosen as the inputs.
The ﬁrst evaluation item was naturalness: the subjects
judged the naturalness of the presented laughter-sound stimuli
on a 5-point scale. Here, naturalness refers to whether the stim-
ulus sounds like a human laugh rather than an artiﬁcial one. The
conditions consisted of four SPSS-based models and a Fish-
Speech model evaluated under three prompting conditions, in
addition to the natural laughter, resulting in eight ( = 4 + 3 + 1)
conditions. In total, the stimulus set comprised 320 stimuli
( = 4 speakers × 10 input sequences × 8 models).
The second evaluation item was the similarity of the way of
laughing (i.e., similarity in laughter form) to the natural laugh-
ter. The third evaluation item was the similarity of individu-
ality to the natural laughter. For these items, subjects judged
each synthesized stimulus in comparison with its reference nat-
ural laughter on a 5-point scale. The conditions consisted of
6458
Natural SPSS Fish
Natural ManualLabel AutoLabel AutoLabel+ NoLabel ManualLabel AutoLabel NoLabel
2
3
4MOS
Figure 3: Mean Opinion Scores of naturalness for the synthe-
sized laughter sounds.
SPSS Fish
way of laughingindividuality
ManualLabel AutoLabel AutoLabel+ NoLabel ManualLabel AutoLabel NoLabel
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5SMOS
Figure 4: Similarity Mean Opinion Scores of “way of laughing”
and individuality for the synthesized laughter sounds.
four SPSS-based models and a Fish-Speech model under three
prompting conditions, resulting in seven ( = 4 + 3 ) conditions.
In total, the stimulus set comprised 280 pairs ( = 4 speakers ×
10 input sequences × 7 models).
A total of 20 subjects participated in the naturalness evalu-
ation, and 30 in the similarity evaluation, recruited via crowd-
sourcing. The similarity evaluation was divided into two sub-
sets, each evaluated by 20 subjects.
Figure 3 and Table 3(a) show the distribution of mean opin-
ion scores (MOS) of naturalness for each stimulus. According
to multiple comparisons using Tukey’s honestly signiﬁcant dif-
ference (HSD) test (signiﬁcance level 5%), For SPSS-generated
stimuli, ManualLabel was signiﬁcantly higher than AutoLa-
bel+, and NoLabel was signiﬁcantly lower than the other con-
ditions. For Fish-Speech, no signiﬁcant differences were ob-
served in the multiple comparisons.
Figure 4 and Table 3(b)(c) show the distribution of sim-
ilarity MOS (SMOS) for “way of laughing” and individual-
ity. Tukey’s HSD test revealed signiﬁcant differences across all
combinations of conditions for SPSS, and no signiﬁcant pair-
wise differences were observed for Fish-Speech. The same ten-
dency was observed for individuality.
SPSS with Nolabel showed an extremely low similarity in
“way of laughing.” When responses for NoLabel are excluded,
Table 3: MOS and SMOS summary: Means and 95% CIs.
(a) MOS: Naturalness
ManualLabel AutoLabel AutoLabel+ NoLabel
SPSS 2.71 ±0.18 2.51 ±0.18 2.27 ±0.15 1.62 ±0.02
Fish 3.62 ±0.21 3.48 ±0.25 — 3.46±0.28
Natural 3.94±0.21
(b) SMOS: Way of laughing
ManualLabel AutoLabel AutoLabel+ NoLabel
SPSS 3.94 ±0.18 3.46 ±0.22 3.11 ±0.21 1.37 ±0.07
Fish 2.58 ±0.23 2.53 ±0.23 — 2.40±0.24
(c) SMOS: Individuality
ManualLabel AutoLabel AutoLabel+ NoLabel
SPSS 3.46 ±0.22 2.95 ±0.21 2.70 ±0.15 1.64 ±0.09
Fish 2.90 ±0.20 2.83 ±0.22 — 2.64±0.18
the average SMOS for “way of laughing” was 3.94 for SPSS and
2.58 for Fish-Speech; an ANOV A revealed a signiﬁcant main
effect of model. On the other hand, the average SMOS of indi-
viduality was 3.46 for SPSS 2.90 for Fish-Speech; an ANOV A
did not show a signiﬁcant main effect of model.
5.3. Discussions
Answer to RQ1 — Partly yes. The manual and automatic laugh-
ter phone labels signiﬁcantly improved naturalness and similar-
ity over the NoLabel condition for SPSS-based laughter synthe-
sizer.
Although the overall tendency was the same for Fish-
Speech, the effect of phone labels was not statistically signif-
icant. Laughter generated by Fish-Speech exhibited impressive
naturalness even without supervision by laughter phones. How-
ever, it was generally too uniform, and the beneﬁt of injecting
laughter phone annotation as prompts was limited, given our
focus on annotation usefulness rather than LLM behavior.
Answer to RQ2 — Not quite sufﬁcient. For SPSS, the
ManualLabel condition consistently outperformed AutoLabel
or AutoLabel+. One possible contributor is an annotation-style
mismatch between the training phase (automatic labels) and the
inference phase (manual ground truth). This mismatch may be
mitigated by employing a laughter phone language model [ 1]
trained on automatic labels. In addition, augmenting the train-
ing set with laughter samples from diverse speakers (AutoLa-
bel+) did not yield a positive effect. Nevertheless, the similarity
of way of laughing achieved by SPSS-based AutoLabel model
(3.46) was still much higher than that of Fish-Speech (2.58).
Answer to RQ3 — From the viewpoint of naturalness,
laughter synthesis with Fish-Speech is excellent, approaching
natural laughter. This is a major advantage of the token-based
approach over the SPSS-based one. However, from the view-
point of the way of laughing, the similarity of SPSS-generated
laughter was much higher than that of the Fish-generated laugh-
ter.
Summary. Accurate laughter phone annotation is impor-
tant for SPSS-based laughter synthesis. To realize a laughter
synthesis model with high reproducibility of the way of laugh-
ing across diverse conversational situations, while maintaining
naturalness, further improvements in the accuracy of automatic
laughter phone annotation are required. On the other hand, for
audio-LLM-based laughter synthesis, prompting with laughter
phone annotation is not sufﬁcient to improve the reproducibil-
ity of the way of laughing. Additional strategies, such as ﬁne-
tuning the LLM by treating laughter as a new “language,” are
likely necessary.
6. Conclusions
This study evaluated automatic laughter phone annotation for
socially situated laughter synthesis. Using a newly annotated
eleven-speaker laughter dataset, we built an improved laugh-
ter phone recognizer and conﬁrmed its effectiveness for unseen
speakers. We then set up two laughter sound synthesizers, an
SPSS-based model and a Fish-Speech-based model, using au-
tomatically annotated phone labels. Listening tests on natu-
ralness and similarity revealed that Fish-Speech offers higher
naturalness, whereas SPSS achieved higher reproducibility of
the way of laughing. Currently, a single system satisfying both
properties has not been obtained. Future efforts should improve
controllability in audio-LLM approaches, leveraging their rea-
soning ability.
6459
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
The authors used Microsoft Copilot 365 for editing English.