Exploring Pre-training Benefits on Phoneme Addition
through Fine-tuning in Speech Synthesis
Masato Murata ID 1,2,∗∗, Koichi Miyazaki ID 1, Tomoki Koriyama ID 1, Tomoki Toda ID 2
1 CyberAgent, Japan 2 Nagoya University, Japan
murata masato@cyberagent.co.jp, miyazaki koichi xa@cyberagent.co.jp,
koriyama tomoki@cyberagent.co.jp, tomoki@icts.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Abstract
Transfer learning is widely used for low-resource text-to-
speech. When the target corpus contains phonemes unseen in
pre-training, the model must expand its phoneme inventory dur-
ing fine-tuning; we call the process “phoneme addition.” How-
ever, it remains unclear whether the pre-trained ability to gener-
ate seen phonemes contributes to this process. This study inves-
tigates phoneme addition in two settings: (1) a simulation setup
using LLM-generated phoneme-controlled corpora that enables
investigation without considering confounding factors, and (2)
a real-speech cross-lingual transfer setup (English to Japanese)
to validate whether the findings hold in practice. Experiments in
both settings showed that while fine-tuning achieved higher nat-
uralness than training from scratch, it required as much or more
data to achieve comparable PER for new phonemes. These re-
sults indicate that pre-training mainly contributes to naturalness
improvement, but offers limited benefit for phoneme addition.
Index Terms: Speech synthesis, text-to-speech, phoneme addi-
tion, fine-tuning, transfer learning, cross-lingual TTS
1. Introduction
Recent text-to-speech (TTS) systems have achieved human-
level naturalness in high-resource scenarios. However, develop-
ing low-resource language TTS remains challenging. To solve
this data limitation issue, transfer learning is a standard ap-
proach, where a model is pre-trained on a high-resource lan-
guage and subsequently fine-tuned on the target language. In
practice, the target dataset often contains new phonemes unseen
in pre-training, requiring the model to expand its phoneme in-
ventory to add the phonemes during fine-tuning. This research
focuses on this process, referred to as “phoneme addition.”
Phoneme addition is especially common in cross-lingual
adaptation, where the source language phoneme inventory often
lacks specific phonemes required for target languages. For ex-
ample, when building Spanish TTS from an English pre-trained
model, the model requires adding alveolar trills (rr), and for
the Xhosa language requires adding click consonants (c, q, and
x). In this study, we refer to such new phonemes to be ac-
quired during fine-tuning as “target phonemes,” and define the
pre-trained ability to generate seen phonemes as “pre-trained
phoneme knowledge.” These transfer learning approaches for
low-resource language TTS rely on the assumption that the
linguistic and acoustic knowledge acquired during pre-training
contributes to fine-tuning. Previous studies on low-resource
language TTS have addressed these unseen target phonemes
by phoneme mapping [1–5] or random initialization [6] be-
fore fine-tuning. However, these studies reported only improve-
**indicates the corresponding author.
ə, ɪ, n, m, …, w,ɯ, ɸ, …, Q
ə, ɪ,n,m, …, wSource dataset
(for pre-training)
Target dataset
(for fine-tuning)
Target 
Phonemes
Phoneme
Addition
Figure 1:Overview of the phoneme addition process in trans-
fer learning. The pre-trained model is trained on a source
dataset. During fine-tuning, the phoneme inventory is expanded
by adding target phonemes (red).
ments in overall naturalness and intelligibility, leaving it unclear
whether pre-trained phoneme knowledge really contributes to
the phoneme addition process itself.
To verify the benefits of pre-trained phoneme knowledge,
we investigate this phoneme addition process by comparing
fine-tuning and scratch training on the same target data. This
investigation is expected to lead to more efficient low-resource
TTS development. In this study, we conduct the investigation
under two experimental settings: phoneme-controlled simula-
tion and real-speech cross-lingual transfer. First, we design a
simulated setting using two phoneme-controlled corpora gen-
erated with a large language model (LLM): a “Limited” cor-
pus excluding the specific target phonemes for pre-training,
and a “Full” corpus containing all phonemes (including target
phonemes) for fine-tuning. These datasets enable us to simulate
the phoneme addition process across various conditions, such as
training dataset sizes and target phoneme types. Moreover, they
share the same language and target speaker, ensuring isolation
from confounding factors such as language mismatch, speaker
variation, and data domain differences. Furthermore, we vali-
date our simulation findings in a cross-lingual transfer learning
setting (from English to Japanese) using real speech datasets to
ensure practical applicability.
Our experimental results reveal that TTS models can suc-
cessfully acquire unseen phonemes through fine-tuning. How-
ever, from the perspective of phoneme addition, fine-tuning re-
quires similar or more data than training from scratch to achieve
the same phoneme error rate (PER) for the target phonemes,
regardless of the target phoneme type. We observed this con-
sistent result across both the phoneme-controlled simulation
and the real-speech cross-lingual setting. Although fine-tuning
starts from pre-trained models that have already acquired the
ability to generate seen phonemes, the results indicate that the
contribution of pre-trained phoneme knowledge is limited for
phoneme addition.
5384
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-208
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We introduce LLM-generated phoneme-controlled corpora
for a simulated setting that isolates the phoneme addition pro-
cess from confounding factors, enabling controlled investiga-
tion across dataset sizes and target phoneme types.
• Across both simulated and real-speech cross-lingual trans-
fer settings, we found that pre-training mainly contributes to
speech naturalness improvement, but offers limited benefit
for phoneme addition compared to scratch training.
2. Phoneme-Controlled Corpus Generation
Using LLM
To investigate how pre-trained phoneme knowledge contributes
to unseen phoneme addition through fine-tuning, we design
a phoneme-controlled experimental setup that simulates the
phoneme addition process. These simulation settings enable us
to investigate the phoneme addition process without consider-
ing confounding factors such as language mismatch and dataset
domain differences. We create two types of synthetic corpora
by using an LLM: (1) aLimited Corpusthat excludes specific
target phonemes intended to be added during fine-tuning, and
(2) aFull Corpusthat contains all phonemes, including the tar-
get phonemes. This research uses Claude Opus 4.6 [7] to gen-
erate the corpora. We also use the statistics of the real speech
dataset (VCTK [8]) to ensure the synthetic corpora closely sim-
ulate the real dataset. To control the phoneme distribution,
all generated sentences are verified by converting to IPA us-
ing espeak-ng1 and checking the presence of target phonemes.
The rule-based filtering successfully ensures that both corpora
meet the phoneme constraints: the Limited corpus excludes all
target phonemes, while the Full corpus contains the complete
set of 40 English phonemes. In this paper, we refer to these
LLM-generated texts as “corpora,” and the synthesized speech–
phoneme pairs as “datasets.”
2.1. Limited Corpus for Pre-training
To simulate a pre-training scenario where specific target
phonemes remain unseen, we create the Limited Corpus
through the following process. We first extract an allowed word
list (over 23,000 words) from the CMU Pronouncing Dictio-
nary [9] by selecting only words that do not contain any of the
target phonemes. We then prompt the LLM to generate natu-
ral English sentences of 3–15 words using only words from this
allowed list. Each generated sentence is verified by convert-
ing to IPA using espeak-ng and confirming the absence of tar-
get phonemes. Sentences failing this verification are discarded.
From this verified sentence pool, we sample 1,000 sentences
to match the VCTK statistics such as the average number of
phonemes per utterance and the word-count distribution. Fi-
nally, we use a prepared TTS model to synthesize speech from
the resultant IPA sentences, obtaining paired speech–IPA tran-
scription data for pre-training.
2.2. Full Corpus for Fine-tuning
We create the Full Corpus for the fine-tuning dataset, designed
to enable the fine-tuned model to acquire the ability to generate
new target phonemes. We first generate a large sentence pool
by prompting the LLM to generate natural English sentences
with the word count distribution matched to the VCTK dataset.
1https://github.com/espeak-ng/espeak-ng
Table 1:Statistics of the created phoneme-controlled corpora
(Full and Limited) and VCTK dataset, computed over 1,000
sampled sentences. These synthetic corpora simulate the statis-
tics of the VCTK dataset.
Num. Unique Num. Avg (/Utt)
Dataset Target Type Phonemes Words Phonemes Target WordsPhoneme
VCTK Plosives 40 1,743 26.1 4.83 7.4
Front vowels 40 1,743 26.1 4.82 7.4
Full Plosives 40 1,643 25.9 4.81 7.1
Front vowels 40 1,686 26.3 4.79 7.1
Limited Plosives 34 865 25.1 0 7.2
Front vowels 35 875 22.4 0 7.1
After deduplication filtering, we verify that every sentence con-
tains at least one target phoneme by converting each sentence
to IPA using espeak-ng. As a result, we obtain approximately
30,000 valid sentences. Following the Limited Corpus gener-
ation, we sample 2,000 sentences from this verified sentence
pool to ensure that the synthetic corpus closely simulates the
statistics of the real speech corpus. We then synthesize speech
from the selected IPA sentences using the same TTS model as in
the Limited Corpus generation, resulting in paired speech–IPA
transcription data for fine-tuning.
Table 1 shows statistics of the created phoneme-controlled
corpora, Full and Limited, and the reference VCTK dataset,
with plosive consonants and front vowels as target phonemes.
All statistics are computed over 1,000 randomly sampled sen-
tences. The resultant simulation corpora closely match the
statistics of the real speech dataset.
3. Experiments
This study focuses on two questions: whether a model can
acquire target phonemes unseen in pre-training through fine-
tuning, and how pre-trained knowledge benefits this process.
We conducted two experiments under simulated phoneme-
controlled settings and real-speech cross-lingual transfer set-
tings. In the simulated phoneme-controlled setting (Sec-
tion 3.2), we first verified the effectiveness of pre-trained
phoneme knowledge for phoneme addition using phoneme-
controlled synthetic corpora that kept the language and speaker
fixed. This simulation can reduce confounding factors such
as language, speaker, and data domain differences, which of-
ten arise in cross-lingual experiments. In the real-speech
cross-lingual transfer setting (Section 3.3), we further validated
whether our findings generalize to a cross-lingual transfer learn-
ing setting with real speech datasets.
To assess the effect of training dataset size, both exper-
iments compared the performance of fine-tuned models with
scratch-trained models using various amounts of training data
(100,300,500,800,1,000, and2,000utterances, each ran-
domly selected from the respective target datasets).
3.1. Experimental settings
3.1.1. Model Training Configuration
We used the implementation of Conformer-FastSpeech2
(CFS2) [10–12] and its configurations from ESPnet [13]. For
the pre-training, we followed the training configuration from
ESPnet2, except for using speaker ID conditioning instead of
2https://github.com/espnet/espnet/blob/
master/egs2/vctk/tts1/conf/tuning/train_
5385
the x-vector conditioning. Following the baseline of previous
studies [1, 2, 4], we adopted the naive fine-tuning approach:
the phoneme inventory is expanded to include unseen target
phonemes, with only their embeddings randomly initialized.
For fine-tuning, we removed speaker conditioning to train the
model as a single-speaker model and reduced the learning rate
to one-tenth of its original value. Through the preliminary ex-
periments, we confirmed that varying the learning rate had a
limited effect on the fine-tuned model performance.
As a baseline, we also trained a single-speaker CFS2 model
from scratch (random initialization) on the same dataset as fine-
tuning, denoted as “Scratch.” For waveform generation, we
used a pre-trained HiFi-GAN [14] vocoder from the Parallel-
WaveGAN repository3 trained on the VCTK dataset.
3.1.2. Evaluation metrics
To assess the effectiveness of the pre-trained knowledge from
various perspectives, we evaluate phoneme addition perfor-
mance and naturalness. For phoneme-addition evaluation, we
use a wav2vec 2.0-based phoneme recognition model [15] to
compute the target phoneme error rate (Target PER). Inspired
by the biased-WER [16–18], Target PER measures how accu-
rately the model generates newly added phonemes by calculat-
ing PER solely on the target phonemes. For naturalness evalua-
tion, we employed the pre-trained UTMOS model4 [19], which
simulates the mean opinion score (MOS) of synthesized speech.
3.2. Simulated Phoneme-Controlled Settings
This experiment investigates how pre-trained knowledge con-
tributes to phoneme addition during fine-tuning using simulated
phoneme-controlled datasets. Since all utterances were gener-
ated by the same synthesis pipeline, acoustic conditions were
consistent across corpora. This allows a focused investigation
of phoneme addition across various conditions, including train-
ing dataset sizes and target phoneme types.
3.2.1. Prepared TTS model for simulated dataset creation
To build the synthetic speech–phoneme paired datasets, we used
a prepared TTS model trained on the VCTK dataset, which
contains approximately 44 hours of English speech from 108
speakers [8]. For its training, we converted text from the VCTK
dataset to IPA-style phoneme sequences using espeak-ng. Us-
ing this model, we created speech–phoneme paired datasets by
synthesizing audio for the LLM-generated “Limited” and “Full”
text corpora, as described in Section 2.
3.2.2. Simulated datasets with phoneme-controlled speech
We created speech–phoneme paired datasets by synthesizing
audio for the LLM-generated “Limited” and “Full” text corpora
using the prepared TTS model described in Section 3.2.1:
Limited dataset(for pre-training): Contains 107,000 utter-
ances (55 hours) from 107 speakers excluding the target speaker
(a female native English speaker, p299), which is a larger scale
than the VCTK dataset. This dataset excludes specific target
phonemes intended to be added during fine-tuning.
Full dataset(for fine-tuning): Contains 2,000 utterances from
the target speaker (p299). This dataset contains all English
xvector_conformer_fastspeech2.yaml
3https://github.com/kan-bayashi/
ParallelWaveGAN
4https://github.com/sarulab-speech/UTMOS22
phonemes, including the target phonemes.
We first created a pre-trained TTS model trained on the
Limited dataset, and subsequently fine-tuned this model with
the Full dataset. To investigate how pre-trained knowledge con-
tributes to phoneme addition during fine-tuning, we compared
fine-tuning against training a model from scratch on the Full
dataset.
3.2.3. Target Phonemes and Evaluation
To evaluate the influence of target phoneme type on phoneme
addition performance, we conducted experiments with two dif-
ferent groups of target phonemes:Plosive Consonant(/p/,
/b/, /t/, /d/, /k/, and /g/) andFront vowels(/i/, /I/, /eI/,
/E/, and /æ/). We evaluated synthesized speech using a VCTK
text subset of 1,000 sentences, each containing at least one tar-
get phoneme. These sentences were not included in the train-
ing dataset for pre-training and fine-tuning. For PER evaluation
in English, we used a wav2vec 2.0-based phoneme recognition
model fine-tuned on VCTK dataset.
3.3. Real-speech Cross-lingual Transfer Setting
In this Section, we further validated whether our findings gen-
eralize to a practical cross-lingual transfer learning scenario.
Specifically, we conducted a cross-lingual phoneme addition
experiment from English to Japanese using real speech datasets.
3.3.1. Real-speech English and Japanese Speech Datasets
As the source-language (English) dataset for pre-training, we
used the VCTK dataset. As the target-language (Japanese) cor-
pus, we used the single-speaker JSUT dataset [20].
VCTK (English) dataset(for pre-training): Contains approxi-
mately 44 hours of English speech from 108 native speakers.
JSUT (Japanese) dataset(for fine-tuning): Contains approx-
imately 10 hours of Japanese speech from a single native fe-
male speaker. This experiment used the basic5000 set of the
JSUT dataset. For Japanese text preprocessing, we converted
Japanese transcriptions to phoneme sequences using pyopen-
jtalk 5and mapped the outputs to IPA symbols.
We created a pre-trained English TTS model trained with
the VCTK dataset, and subsequently fine-tuned this model
with the randomly sampled subset of the JSUT dataset. To
investigate how English pre-trained knowledge contributes to
Japanese phoneme addition during fine-tuning, we compared
the Japanese fine-tuned model from an English pre-trained
model against a Japanese scratch-trained model.
3.3.2. Target Phonemes and Evaluation
For cross-lingual phoneme addition, during fine-tuning, we ex-
panded the base English phoneme vocabulary of 40 symbols by
adding 20Japanese-specific phonemesunseen during English
pre-training. Specifically, the added phonemes are grouped as
follows: vowels (/a/, /e/, /o/, /W/), stops (/b j/, /c/, /d j/,
/é/, /pj/), affricates (/ts/, /tC/, /dý/), fricatives (/ç/, /C/, /F/),
nasals (/m j/, /ñ/, /ð/), flap (/R j/), and geminate consonant
(/Q/). This experiment regarded these 20 Japanese-specific
phonemes as target phonemes. For evaluation, we used 100
Japanese sentences from the JVS corpus [21] as test texts, en-
suring that they were not used for training. For PER evaluation
in Japanese, we used a wav2vec 2.0-based phoneme recognition
model fine-tuned on JSUT basic5000 dataset.
5https://github.com/r9y9/pyopenjtalk
5386
(a) Plosive Consonant (b) Front V owel
Figure 2:Target PER (%) (top) and UTMOS score (bottom)
comparison between fine-tuning (blue solid) and scratch train-
ing (red dashed) for (a) plosive consonants and (b) front vowels
across various dataset sizes.
4. Experimental Results
4.1. Results in Simulated Phoneme-Controlled Setting
Figure 2 shows Target PER and UTMOS score comparisons be-
tween fine-tuning and training from scratch for plosive conso-
nants and front vowels across various dataset sizes (100, 300,
500, 800, 1,000, and 2,000). Across both target phoneme types,
training from scratch achieved comparable or better PER than
fine-tuning in both cases. In other words, while scratch train-
ing was required to learn the ability to generate speech for all
phonemes from scratch, fine-tuning required approximately the
same or more amount of training data as scratch training to
achieve comparable PER, regardless of the target phoneme type.
From the perspective of phoneme accuracy, this result suggests
that the pre-trained phoneme knowledge is not effectively lever-
aged during fine-tuning phoneme addition. This finding is con-
trary to the common expectation that the linguistic and acoustic
knowledge acquired during pre-training mainly contributes to
the fine-tuning task. In contrast to the Target PER results, we
should note that the pre-trained knowledge contributes to the
perceptual quality of the synthesized speech. Across both target
phoneme types, fine-tuning consistently achieved better natu-
ralness than scratch training across all data sizes. These results
indicate that while the pre-trained phoneme knowledge does not
enhance new phoneme addition, it contributes to improving the
naturalness of the synthesized speech.
Furthermore, we analyzed spectrograms of synthesized
speech by both the fine-tuned model and a model trained
from scratch after phoneme addition of the plosive conso-
nants. In low-resource conditions (100 utterances), scratch
training could produce plosive closure patterns more clearly,
while both approaches became comparable in sufficient data
conditions (more than 1,000 utterances). Notably, the scratch-
trained model could generate the target phonemes as well as
other phonemes. In contrast, while the fine-tuned model could
already produce seen phonemes accurately, it struggled to gen-
erate the new target phonemes. These observations suggest the
differences in training constraints. Specifically, scratch training
can learn all phonemes jointly without any constraints. In con-
trast, fine-tuning acquires the target phonemes while preserving
previously learned phoneme knowledge, which makes it harder
(a) Target PER (b) UTMOS Score
Figure 3:(a) Target PER (%) on Japanese-specific target phonemes
and (b) UTMOS score in a real-speech cross-lingual transfer learning
setting (English VCTK→Japanese JSUT), comparing fine-tuning (blue
solid) and scratch training (red dashed) across various dataset sizes.
to acquire newly added phonemes.
4.2. Results in Real-speech Cross-lingual Transfer Setting
Figure 3 shows the results in the real-speech cross-lingual ex-
periment from English (VCTK) to Japanese (JSUT). For Target
PER on Japanese-specific phonemes, Figure 3 (a) shows that
training from scratch consistently achieved better Target PER
than fine-tuning across all data sizes. This trend is consistent
with the observations in the controlled simulation experiment
described in Section 4.1. This result suggests that, even in
a real-speech cross-lingual transfer learning scenario, the pre-
trained ability to generate seen phonemes offers limited benefit
for acquiring unseen target phonemes.
In contrast, the naturalness evaluations in Figure 3 (b) show
an advantage of pre-training in a low-resource fine-tuning sce-
nario. Fine-tuning achieved higher or comparable UTMOS
scores than scratch training, especially in lower-resource con-
ditions (100, 300, and 500 utterances). These results indi-
cate that pre-training mainly contributes to naturalness improve-
ment, whereas it offers limited benefit for acquiring unseen new
phonemes compared to scratch training.
5. Conclusions
This study investigated how pre-trained phoneme knowledge
contributes to the phoneme addition process through fine-
tuning. We conducted experiments under two settings: (1) a
phoneme-controlled simulation using LLM-generated corpora
to enable the comprehensive evaluation without considering
confounding factors, and (2) a real-speech cross-lingual trans-
fer scenario (English to Japanese) to confirm the validity of our
simulation findings. Across both settings, experimental results
showed that TTS models successfully acquired new phonemes
through fine-tuning regardless of target phoneme types. How-
ever, while fine-tuned models achieved better UTMOS scores,
they only achieved comparable or worse PER compared with
the models trained from scratch. Contrary to the common
expectation, these results indicate that pre-trained phoneme
knowledge does not always benefit phoneme addition. While
the contribution of pre-trained phoneme knowledge is limited
for phoneme addition, pre-training mainly benefits speech natu-
ralness improvement. To leverage pre-trained phoneme knowl-
edge more effectively, we can explore several promising direc-
tions. One approach is using pre-trained models with broader
phoneme inventories to cover more target phonemes, while an-
other involves an auxiliary loss designed to encourage learning
new phonemes. Future work will explore developing methods
for leveraging pre-trained phoneme knowledge more 