Rethinking Consent Acquisition for Voice Synthesis: from Static to Dynamic
Consent
Matilde Nanni ID 1
1 University of Inland Norway, Norway
matilde.nanni@inn.no
Abstract
V oice synthesis raises specific ethical challenges by enabling
third parties to generate speech in a person’s voice without
their involvement or control. Existing safeguards focus on con-
sent acquisition, typically through contractual agreements, and
attempt to regulate this practice via standard data-processing
models of authorisation. However, voices function not only as
data but also as markers of personal identity. As a result, one-
time authorisation of voice data, which cannot be de-identified,
leaves later uses insufficiently regulated and does not prevent
identity-based harms to the original voice sources. This paper
critically examines two models of contractual consent acquisi-
tion, one general and one specific, to show that neither satisfies
the requirements for informed consent. As an alternative, the
paper proposes dynamic consent, a type of informed consent
that has been used in bioethics, as a governance solution better
suited for synthetic voices.
Index Terms: consent acquisition, dynamic consent, identity-
based harm
1. Introduction
Thanks to the latest advancements in voice synthesis technol-
ogy, it is now possible to produce synthetic voices that sound
convincingly human-like [1]. On the one hand, this can result
in significant benefits, for example, restoring the speech of in-
dividuals who have lost the ability to speak [2]. On the other
hand, this can lead to significant ethical challenges [3]. At the
core, the novelty is that others can create a voice that sounds ex-
actly like someone’s, making it say things they never said and/or
would never want to say.
Given these features of voice synthesis, multiple ethical is-
sues arise: first, voice synthesis, just like deepfake technology,
can be harmful to the audience. The inability to distinguish
between human and synthetic voices can undermine trust in
both the content of the speech and its source [4]. Requiring
that AI-generated content be clearly labelled is one attempt to
mitigate such harm [5]. Second, the mismatch between who
the voice sounds like and who decided what the voice says
raises issues regarding attributability and moral responsibility
for speech [6]. Finally, voice synthesis can harm the person
whose voice is synthesised and who is recognisable by others,
and themselves, from that voice. The person may be misat-
tributed utterances they never spoke and their identity may be
misrepresented. Because these harms stem primarily from non-
consensual uses of a synthesised voice, regulatory responses
have focused on strengthening consent acquisition. 1 This pa-
1Consumer Reports conducted an assessment of six companies that
produce synthetic voices and found that four had no meaningful consent
mechanisms in place to prevent nonconsensual use [7].
per develops a sustained analysis of the latter case.
Mitchell and Kaffee [8] propose an interesting suggestion
to strengthen consent via a “voice consent gate”. The voice
consent gate is a system where consent is embedded in the AI
system workflow. This ethical safeguard guarantees that a voice
can be synthesised “only when the speaker explicitly says they
consent” [8] by reading out loud a “consent phrase”. They sug-
gest this can be “I give my consent to use the MODEL voice
cloning model with my voice” followed by a unique sentence
that covers phonetic variety [8]. Therefore, no voice synthesis
can happen unless what the person says matches the text dis-
played. Brintha et al. [9] provide an alternative solution to vali-
date user consent before cloning a voice by embedding a digital
signature scheme into the voice synthesis model. These techni-
cal solutions, together with traditional contractual consent, of-
fer a crucial foundation for harm prevention. However, several
cases involving voice actors and synthetic voice misuse call into
question whether these governance mechanisms are fully apt
[10].
Against this backdrop, this paper makes three contributions.
First, it provides a detailed analysis of how the double nature
of voice as identity and as data in voice synthesis, discussed
by Berkowitz and Sweeney [10], forces us to rethink our con-
sent acquisition practices. Given that voices can be datafied but
never fully de-identified, voices retain a unique connection to
their original source that other kinds of data are not affected
by [10]. Second, it shows why existing contractual agreements
in synthetic voice production, both general and specific, fail
to satisfy the requirements of informed consent. When sys-
tems conceptualise consent as a one-time permission to use de-
identifiable data for a dynamic technology they fail to inform
consent-givers, the original voice sources, about the potential
ethical challenges. Third, it proposes dynamic consent, already
employed in the field of bioethics, as a governance model better
suited to implement consent that is informed, and thus effec-
tive at preventing harm, thanks to a shift from data acquisition
to ongoing control [11]. Pistilli [12] has briefly gestured at dy-
namic consent in the industry context as a way to create “mech-
anisms for individuals to maintain agency over their data’s jour-
ney through AI systems.” This paper develops this concept and
discusses it in detail for the governance of synthetic voice tech-
nologies. Among other points, it outlines one fundamental lim-
itation of this approach. Only individuals with significant nego-
tiating power over the use of their voice may be able to demand
dynamic consent
2. Voice between identity and data
There are several reports—particularly from voice ac-
tors—describing unauthorised or exploitative uses of the syn-
2335
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2379
thesised versions of their voices [3]. The case that follows ex-
emplifies some of these issues.
2.1. Paul Skye Lehrman’s case
Actor Paul Skye Lehrman was hired as a voice talent to pro-
vide voice recordings for research into speech synthesis, which
he was told was confidential work [13]. One day, he listened
to a podcast and recognised his voice among the participants.
Lehrman was shocked. After some research, he was able to find
a company which offers a synthetic voice that sounds like his
voice, among its products [13].
This is just one of many cases in which the importance of
the voice as connected to one’s identity emerges. Lehrman is
harmed because he has no idea or control over what his syn-
thesised voice is being used for. People familiar with his voice
might recognise him from it and believe he is the one saying
what the voice is saying. Unlike before, he is suddenly no
longer fully in charge of his voice. Understanding the connec-
tion between one’s voice and one’s identity helps us uncover
what is at stake when someone’s voice can be perfectly repli-
cated with voice synthesis and used by others.
2.2. Identity: characterisation and identification
According to Leuenberger [14] the connection between one’s
voice and one’s identity can be analysed along two dimensions
of identity: characterisation and identification. According to
the former, a voice relates to one’s identity by encoding certain
characteristics of that identity. Leuenberger [14] identifies three
ways in which this happens more specifically. First, the voice
can express information about who one is. This is categorised
by Herrero [15] into physical, social, and psychological infor-
mation. In fact, a voice can tell us the age of a person, their
geographic origin, and give us insight into their current psycho-
logical state. Second, the voice becomes part of one’s identity
as a feature itself. Having a smoky, sultry voice or a bright and
light voice is a feature that contributes to the picture of who one
is. Third, the voice can shape one’s identity. An example of this
is having a louder or quieter voice. The second dimension is
identification. Thanks to voices we are able to identify speak-
ers and reidentify them over time [14]. When we hear a certain
voice, we can tell whether we know that person and, if we do
know them, who they are. Moreover, we can also be sure that
when we are talking on the phone to someone with a familiar
voice they are the same person we talked to before.
From this, two implications become apparent and are rele-
vant to this discussion: one, upon hearing a voice people tend to
track it back to a person with an identity; two, that people have
an interest in how their voice is used because it is part of their
identity.
2.3. The datafication of the voice
Anonymising voices, but also faces, requires camouflaging and
distorting those features that make them unique as expressions
of someone’s identity [16]. If we compare it to other personal
data, for instance medical data, we see that these are not trace-
able to one individual in the same way [10]. In fact, this kind of
data can be de-identified so that it cannot be recognised as be-
longing to one specific individual. Berkowitz and Sweeney [10]
argue that voice cloning creates a tension between the value of
“voice as intrinsic property of the self” and “value of voice as
product”. This happens because synthetic voices exist at the
intersection of two frameworks: first, voices, as unique expres-
sion of self, function as identity markers in the social framework
[10], second, voices are yet another kind of data used to train a
model and create a product to be sold for profit in the commod-
ity framework [10].
Lehrman’s case is one of many in which the social dimen-
sion of voice is overlooked, and the voice is treated merely as
data. While consent may be obtained to use the voice as data, it
is clearly insufficient to address its broader social and personal
implications. At the same time, the datafication of voice is in-
evitable, as voices must be transformed into data to train mod-
els. This suggests that it is all the more important that consent
can go beyond mere data collection and that companies incorpo-
rate an understanding of the social framework into their consent
practices, and clarify not only that voice data is collected, but
also how it will be used.
3. Informed consent
Lehrman consented to give his voice recordings for research on
speech synthesis, but he did not authorise their use in a podcast.
He could not have, which makes his consent intuitively less than
informed at the time. The consent mechanism in place failed to
protect him, allowing his likeness to be used by others without
authorisation—precisely what consent is meant to prevent. Let
us consider what informed consent is in more detail.
3.1. Valid consent
Consent is defined by Miller and Wertheimer [17] as a pro-
tection mechanism to prevent “unauthorised invasions of peo-
ple’s bodies and property”, which Eyal [18] more generally de-
scribes as “one’s private sphere”. When people consent to hav-
ing their likeness represented in a certain way by someone else,
they release others from the duty not to represent them in that
way. When consent is denied, or when no valid consent trans-
action takes place, any subsequent violation by the consent-
seeker leaves what Dougherty [19] calls a “moral residue”. This
residue may give grounds for claims of legal nature in some in-
stances, apologies, and compensations for the harm suffered.
For consent to be valid, it has to be informed. According to
T¨annsj¨o [20], the main feature of informed consent is that it
enables “participatory decision-making” in medical ethics and
bioethics. Eyal [18] defines informed consent as consent that is
informed, voluntary, and decisionally-capacitated. Consent giv-
ing can be explicit, e.g. as in document signing such as signing
a contract; or implied, e.g. a behaviour or gesture that implies
one gives consent, such as sticking out one’s arm when one do-
nates blood.
3.2. The scope of consent
Consent is informed when the consent-giver is a “capacitated”
or “competent” participant to whom complete information has
been provided, who fully understands that information, and who
voluntarily agrees to participate on that basis [18]. Going back
to Lehrman’s case, we see that only the first condition applies:
Lehrman was a competent participant who did not receive com-
plete information about what the voice data could be used for
so that he could not fully understand it or voluntarily agree to
have his voice in the podcast. The latter was, in fact, something
that could not have fallen within the scope of his consent. The
scope of consent is the space of permissible actions the consent-
giver is allowing [19]. The scope is determined by reliable
evidence that both the consent-giver and the consent-receiver
can reasonably accept to support the interpretation of what the
2336
consent-giver is consenting to [19]. According to Dougherty
[19] the scope of consent depends not only on the evidence al-
ready available, but also on additional reliable information that
the consent-receiver has a responsibility to obtain. Once again,
if we look at Lehrman’s case, it appears that the two parties had
different interpretations of what the scope of consent was, or
which actions were permissible. Moreover, the consent-receiver
failed to investigate whether Lehrman was giving blanket con-
sent to the use of this voice.
3.3. Consent: general or specific
This brings the discussion to consider another dimension of
consent: consent can be either general or specific. Consent is
defined as “general”, or broad, when permission is given for
something without specifying exactly what that is, so that the
consent-giver does not know all the details of what they are
consenting to [21]. Conversely, consent is defined as “specific”
when permission has to be given to each well-defined and spec-
ified item separately. The issue with general consent, while
arguably more efficient and less bureaucratic, is that under-
specifying what falls into the scope of one’s consent can result
in failing to acquire consent that was truly informed, and for the
action one wants to get consent for. As an example, O’Neill
[22] examines consent to organ donation: people might consent
to donate their organs without realising that skin is also classi-
fied as an organ and, thus, essentially consent to something that
falls outside the scope of their consent. This happens because
people fail to understand the underlying entailments of consent-
giving in that situation. Specifying in great detail what one is
consenting to is not without issues either, however. First, it can
be difficult because it is practically complex and taxing to have
people go through infinite lists of what they want to or do not
want to consent to [23]. Second, as trivial as this may sound,
consent-givers cannot be fully informed about the complete list
of harms that could derive from the range of permissible actions
they are consenting to, no matter how well-defined these may be
[24].
4. Consent acquisition in contracts
Recent proposals such as the voice consent gate offer a way to
embed consent acquisition as a technical safeguard in the AI
system. Yet these innovations do not fully replace the need for
contractual agreements, which continue to serve as the founda-
tional mechanism for securing consent to use voice data to train
models in voice-synthesis production. Notwithstanding the dif-
ficulty in finding contract templates for voice actors freely avail-
able online, the author was able to gain temporary access to,
and assess, two examples of general and specific consent acqui-
sition.
4.1. BeyondWords: a case of general consent
An example of general consent was used by BeyondWords [25].
In the UK version of their voice cloning contract, they state in
clause 4.2 that the “[c]ompany may not use the V oice Model
(the synthesised version of the consent-giver’s voice) to gener-
ate Audio Assets which are patently obscene or racist”. Other-
wise, (clause 4.3) “there are no restrictions on the type or nature
of Audio Assets the company may generate”. The contract also
states that the consent-giver consents to granting “all copyright
and neighbouring and related rights (intellectual property rights,
IPRs)”, including moral rights, to the company for the duration
of the term agreed in the contract.
This kind of contract showcases the issues of general in-
formed consent: Consent-givers are asked to consent to any use
of the synthesised version of their voice with the exception of
two very broad categories (“obscene or racist”). The two cat-
egories are, first of all, relatively open to interpretation, but,
most importantly, do not cover multiple other uses which can
be harmful to the original voice source. As long as a synthetic
voice remains recognisable as the original speaker, they may
find it harmful if it is used to promote a product they do not en-
dorse or a cause that conflicts with their values. For example,
we can imagine some people will not want to support products
with unproven weight loss claims or meat ads, none of which
fall under obscene or racist. In effect, by under-specifying what
the consent-givers can consent to, and how different uses affect
their reputation through their voice, such contracts fail to pro-
tect the consent-givers from harm. What is more, the contract
also stipulates that any IPRs can be assigned or transferred to
a third party by the company (clause 4.5) “only with the con-
sent of [the voice actor, but that] such consent [should] not to
be unreasonably withheld”. These contracts amplify the po-
tential harms by creating an even greater distance between the
original voice source and how the synthetic voice is used. The
latter is regarded as a product and not as a ”sonic appendage”,
as defined by Berkowitz and Sweeney [10], of the original voice
source. Robert Sciglimpaglia, an attorney who deals with cases
of voice cloning, warns voice actors to avoid precisely this type
of contract [26].
Broad static consent does not take into account the social di-
mension of the voice or that voice synthesis is a dynamic tech-
nology. By ignoring these two elements and requesting blan-
ket consent from the original voice source, this kind of contract
struggles to acquire consent that is informed and succeeds in
harm prevention.
4.2. Narrativ: a case of specific consent
An alternative solution, which promoted “Ethical A.I. Use” and
offered a safer option for digital voice replicas, was the partner-
ship between SAG-AFTRA and Narrativ [27]. At the time of
writing this paper, the contract is, however, no longer in effect
since September 24, 2025, because Narrativ has ceased to exist
[27]. The author of this paper was able to access the Narra-
tiv portal while the partnership was still active [28]. The por-
tal adopted a model of specific informed consent by allowing
consent-givers to choose what to consent to from 47 categories,
and several more subcategories. The consent-givers could opt
out of any category, or even only a subcategory. On the one
hand, this consent acquisition system was able to offer a higher
level of protection to consent-givers and prevent them from hav-
ing their likeness misrepresented because they could better re-
strict the scope of permissible actions.
On the other hand, some unforeseeable issues did not fit into
these static categories. Or, even when they did, the categories
themselves could be beneficial or harmful from the perspective
of the original voice source. For example, the category “health”
could include both no smoking campaigns, which are benefi-
cial, and pro-life campaigns, which not everyone will want to
support with their voice. Furthermore, the meaning of some of
the categories would be very likely to change through time so
they would need to be renegotiated. These limitations suggest
that the core issue is not simply whether consent is broad or
specific, but whether consent is conceived as a static event or an
ongoing governance process
2337
5. Rethinking consent: a lesson from
bioethics
What other options are available to ensure people can give in-
formed consent to the use of their synthesised voices and harm
is minimised? At one extreme, Turow [29] argues that the
acquisition of true meaningful informed consent is impossi-
ble because of how difficult it would be to explain the “short-
and long-term implications in the voice market”. On the other
hand, Patel [30] in her proposal to have synthetic voices enter
the copyright regime points out that the original voice sources
should simply have to consent to every specific use by a specific
entity for a specific timeframe, which could possibly be the du-
ration of the copyright. Andreotta et al. [23] call this kind of
consent “express consent”.
5.1. Dynamic consent
A promising alternative, increasingly adopted in the field of
medical ethics and bioethics, but also for the processing of
other personal data, is dynamic consent [31, 11, 32]. Unlike
static consent acquisition, dynamic consent is a consent acqui-
sition framework in which consent-givers can review, update,
and change what they consent to over time [11]. This means
that consent-givers remain in control of their data, since they
can modify their consent in response to changes in data pro-
cessing and in their preferences. Moreover, its strength lies in
allowing consent-givers to dynamically extend and refine the
scope of their consent, given that they can update what they
consent to, as new uses of their data arise that could not be fore-
seen. Another crucial element is the possibility to withdraw
one’s consent at any time for future uses. In biomedical research
dynamic consent is usually implemented through a personalised
digital platform [11]. The platform facilitates the consent pro-
cess but also the communication between consent-givers and
consent-receivers, in this case participants and researchers, so
that the latter can provide additional information to make con-
sent informed [11]. The advantage of the platform, compared
to the static contract format, is that consent is not something to
be acquired once but something that is managed. The platform
is a control centre for the flow of one’s data. There is a history
of use cases. Consent-givers receive new requests for new uses
of their data in the dashboard interface and, based on the expla-
nation for that use, they decide whether to approve it. Dynamic
consent management systems are also being developed outside
e-healthcare for data protection to comply with the rules and
laws regarding data protection [32]. It is outside the scope of
this paper to get into the technical implementation of a dynamic
consent management system but see Khalid et al. [32] for a
model that enhances privacy and security.
This paper argues that dynamic consent platforms where
consent-givers have centralised control and can give, or with-
hold consent, to the different uses is particularly suited to
voice synthesis. Identity-based harms are context-sensitive and
change through time. Dynamic consent accommodates these
requirements by allowing the original voice sources to choose
where they want their voices to be used and heard. For ex-
ample, an original voice source may authorise the use of their
synthetic voice in an ad for a fast-food chain, but later withdraw
that authorisation, if continued association with the company
or the product no longer aligns with their personal or profes-
sional identity. Dynamic consent is sensitive to the connec-
tion between one’s voice and one’s identity both with respect
to identification and characterisation. The original voice source
authorises the contexts in which they may be recognised from
the synthetic voice. In doing so, they exercise control over how
their identity is expressed and represented.
Therefore, introducing and enforcing dynamic consent in
voice synthesis wo