DECRA: Dynamic Emotion Control for Real-time Speech Anonymization
Ghady Nasrallah, Waris Quamer, Mu-Ruei Tseng, Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, US
{ghadynasrallah,quamer.waris,mtseng,rgutier}@tamu.edu
Abstract
Real-time speaker anonymization requires neutralizing or con-
trolling emotional states with causal, low-latency synthesis to
prevent leakage of sensitive paralinguistic information. How-
ever, most expressive VC systems operate offline and rely on
global style conditioning, which limits real-time use and dy-
namic emotion control. In addition, speaker representations
commonly used for VC entangle speaker identity with emo-
tional attributes, making emotion control weaker and less re-
liable. We propose DECRA 1, a real-time streaming VC sys-
tem that performs closed-loop, time-varying prosody control.
It conditions synthesis on continuous valence–arousal (V A) tra-
jectories predicted online by a causal speech emotion recog-
nition (SER) model, while disentangling speaker identity from
emotion. The resulting system is streamable end-to-end, with
<80 ms GPU latency. Experiments show improved V A-space
emotion steering over SOTA baselines and demonstrate dy-
namic, time-varying emotion control.
Index Terms: Speech anonymization, emotional speech con-
trol, streaming architectures
1. Introduction
Beyond linguistic content, speech carries both biometric (e.g.
sex, age) and paralinguistic information (e.g. dialect, emotion),
which can be exploited for speaker recognition, profiling or
behavioral assessments. This creates significant voice-privacy
risks, as reflected in efforts such as the V oice Privacy Challenge
[1], and federal programs such as IARPA ARTS [2]. In many
cases, protecting speech thus requires two complementary ca-
pabilities: obfuscating the identity of a speaker and controlling
their emotional expressiveness (e.g., neutralizing, attenuating)
to prevent leakage of the speaker’s affective state.
However, existing methods have yet to bridge the gap be-
tween anonymization and emotion control. First, streaming
voice conversion (VC)/anonymization systems focus on identity
conversion without explicit prosody or emotion control, so they
can unintentionally preserve/leak emotion-related cues. Sec-
ond, VC models that offer emotion/prosody control generally
operate offline, making them unsuitable for applications with
strict latency constraints. Moreover, these systems only perform
emotion control at the utterance level, limiting time-varying ma-
nipulation in conversational speech. Existing approaches also
lack closed-loop, input-adaptive emotion control, or the abil-
ity to track the speaker’s current affect and shift it dynamically
(e.g., neutralizing, attenuating, or amplifying emotion).
We present DECRA (Dynamic Emotion Control for Real-
time Speech Anonymization), a causal, low-latency, streaming
1Demo:https://ghadynasrallah.github.io/
decra-demo
emotion VC system. Unlike prior approaches that operate at
the utterance level, DECRA enables fine-grained, time-varying
prosody control using continuous valence-arousal trajectories.
To enable simultaneous anonymization and emotion control,
DECRA uses parallel speaker and emotion encoder branches.
The system uses adversarial learning to disentangle timbre and
emotion, allowing VC through the speaker branch while manip-
ulating expressive prosody independently through the emotion
branch. To enable emotion control at scale, we use large natu-
ral speech corpora by generating pseudo valence–arousal labels
with an offline SER model, encouraging more realistic (non-
exaggerated) prosody, instead of relying on small acted emotion
corpora (e.g., ESD [3]). This setup makes our training pipeline
applicable to any dataset without emotion annotationsandim-
proves generalization of VC to unseen speakers, which remains
a challenge for prior emotion VC models [4].
The main contributions of this work are: (1)Simultaneous
voice/emotion conversion:A streaming system that can per-
form voice and emotion conversion simultaneously with fine-
grained control of voice timbre and continuous valence/arousal
levels; (2)Dynamic emotion control: An integrated causal
streaming module that predicts frame-wise valence and arousal
trajectories online, enabling closed-loop emotion control during
streaming inference; and (3)Scalability: A training pipeline
that does not require speech corpora with emotion annotations
thusimproving generalization to unseen speakers, which re-
mains a challenge for existing emotion VC models.
2. Related Work
Anonymization and VC.Recent speech anonymization work
[1] approach the problem through learning-based voice con-
version (VC) that explicitly separates linguistic content from
speaker identity. These systems (e.g., DarkStream [5], TVTSyn
[6]) extract content representations from self-supervised speech
models, e.g., HuBERT [7], often with bottlenecks (e.g. VQ
[8]) to suppress speaker/style cues. Synthesis is then condi-
tioned on speaker embeddings (e.g. x-vectors [9], ECAPA-
TDNN [10]) to select a target pseudo-speaker.However, these
streaming systems lack explicit prosody control or the ability
to disentangle dynamic attributes (e.g. emotion) from static
speaker traits.
Emotion VC.EVC methods rely on neural models that di-
rectly learn emotion conversion in a non-parallel fashion using
autoencoder-style frameworks. In GAN-based models such as
StarGAN-EVC [11], control is often limited to discrete emo-
tion labels rather than continuous intensity. Later work in-
troduced explicit control over emotion strength with discrete
emotion labels. EmoV ox [12] learns emotion intensity via
relative-attribute (ranking), while EmoReg [13] regulates inten-
sity by shifting self-supervised emotion embeddings along un-
4271
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2927
Figure 1:(a) Training and (b) inference architecture of the pro-
posed system (DECRA)
supervised direction vectors in the emotion embedding space.
More recent end-to-end models such as PA VITS [14] condi-
tion prosody on continuous valence-arousal (V/A) coordinates
instead of categorical labels to support smooth emotion con-
trol, and have adopted flow matching [15] generators (e.g.
VEVO [16]) for higher fidelity and better emotion coverage.
However, most EVC systems operate offline, rely on global
utterance-level conditioning, cannot provide time-varying emo-
tion control in response to a speaker’s evolving prosody, and
lack the ability to perform voice and emotion conversion simul-
taneously, which the work presented here aims to address.
3. Methods
DECRA is a streaming VC model with time-varying emotion
control that can predict and adjust a speaker’s emotional state
through V/A controls, while either preserving or anonymizing
the original speaker identity under real-time constraints –see
Figure 1. Using TVTSyn [6] as the VC backbone, DECRA uses
a content encoder to extract linguistic tokens and a speaker en-
coder to generate time-varying timbre (TVT) embeddings con-
ditioned on both a global speaker embedding and the content
tokens. DECRA uses adversarial training to reduce emotion
leakage into the speaker embedding. Emotion is controlled via
a closed-loop feedback mechanism: a causal speech emotion
recognition (SER) head attached to the content representations
provides online predictions ofE(t) = [V(t),A(t)], which are
fed back to the emotion controller to support streaming synthe-
sis. Finally, a waveform decoder synthesizes the output speech.
3.1. TVTSyn backbone
Content encoder. TVTSyn converts input speech into a se-
quence of 512-dim frame-level content embeddings (tokens)
designed to preserve linguistic information while suppressing
speaker cues.2 A factorized vector-quantized (VQ) bottleneck
is applied to further remove residual speaker information and
2The encoder is a causal 1-D CNN with four strided downsampling
stages (stride ratios 8, 5, 4, 2), resulting in an overlap hop size of 320
samples ( 20 ms at 16 kHz), followed by a stack of 8 causal multi-head
self-attention (MHSA) blocks with a fixed 2 s look-back window and a
limited look-ahead context (up to 80 ms) for improved coarticulation.
regularize the content space.
Speaker encoder. TVTSyn models speaker identity as a time-
varying timbre (TVT) sequence{s t}conditioned on the se-
quence of content tokens. The model projects a 704-dim global
speaker embeddingg(concatenated x-vector [9] and ECAPA-
TDNN [10]) into a Global Timbre Memory (GTM) withK=
48key-value slots{(k i,v i)}48
i=1. Each slot is parameterized as
the sum of a speaker-dependent component produced by MLPs
and a learnable prototype prior:
ki = MLP k(g)i +k prior
i , v i = MLP v(g)i +v prior
i .(1)
At each framet, the content embeddingc t attends over{k i}
to retrieve a context-dependent timbre vectorv t. To model
per-frame deviations from the global identity, it interpolates be-
tweengand the GTM-retrieved vectorv t using Slerp. A gating
network predictsα t∈[0,1]to yield a time-varying smooth tim-
bre trajectorys t = Slerp(g,v t;α t). For more details, please
refer to the original paper [6].
3.2. Emotion neutralization and conditioning
To reduce emotion leakage, DECRA uses an MLP projector
with a residual skip connection to map the global speaker em-
beddingginto an emotion-free timbre subspace. The projec-
tor is trained with a dual objective: end-to-end reconstruction
through a waveform decoder, and an adversarial loss where
an MLP V/A regressor with gradient reversal is attached to
the projected speaker embedding to suppress emotion infor-
mation. Emotion information is explicitly provided back to
the decoder through the V/A conditioning signal to allow self-
reconstruction. The adversarial regressor is supervised using
utterance-level V/A pseudo-labels from an external offline SER
model [17]; the resulting projected embedding is then used to
generate GTM-based TVT embeddings.
To enable smooth control, we use continuous valence–
arousal (V/A) levels3 instead of discrete labels (e.g., angry, sad).
Since our goal is time-varying emotion control under streaming
constraints, we condition the model on a V/A trajectory rather
than a single utterance-level estimate. Following [18], we use
an external offline SER model [17] to generate V/A pseudo-
labels over time. We compute a V/A sequence with a hop size
of 250 ms and a context window of 500 ms. The resulting V/A
sequence is projected to a 32-D conditioning embedding using
a1×1Conv1D (i.e., a position-wise linear layer). We then lin-
early interpolate the conditioning sequence to match the 20 ms
frame rate of the content and TVT embeddings, and concatenate
it with the decoder conditioning to guide waveform generation.
3.3. Causal emotion control
To enable streaming emotion control, we attach a causal SER
head to content encoder features before the VQ bottleneck and
perform frame-level V/A regression. The SER head is a fully
causal 1-D CNN with three layers (kernel size5) and dilations
{1,2,4}, each followed by ReLU. With a 20 ms frame hop, this
stack has a receptive field of29frames (∼580ms) using only
past context (no look-ahead). A final linear layer maps CNN
outputs to per-frame V/A predictions, which are used as the on-
line emotion control signal. The SER head is supervised using
per-frame V/A pseudo-labels with Huber loss. We also apply
a first-order temporal smoothness regularization loss to encour-
age stable predictions in adjacent frames.
3The third dimension in the Circumplex model (Dominance) is
highly correlated with arousal, so we only use valence and arousal.
4272
Table 1:Subjective A/B emotion classification accuracy
Direction Class Accuracy (%)±SD
Emotion→Neutral Angry→Neutral 92.5±13.9
Happy→Neutral 91.7±11.4
Sad→Neutral 40.9±18.2
Neutral→Emotion Neutral→Angry 84.2±24.7
Neutral→Happy 63.8±22.7
Neutral→Sad 91.7±15.5
3.4. Waveform decoder
The waveform decoder reconstructs speech from the condi-
tioned latent sequence in a streaming fashion. Conditioning
incorporates both time-varying timbre and emotion. Lets∈
RB×192×T denote the (emotion-disentangled) TVT speaker
embeddings and lete∈R B×32×T denote the interpolated V/A
conditioning embeddings. We form a joint conditioning se-
quenceu= [s;e]and apply a Conditional Layer Normalization
with Fusion module. Given latent featuresx∈R B×512×T ,
the module normalizesx, predicts per-frame affine parameters
(γt,β t)fromu t, and fuses a gated, normalized version ofu t:
yt = Proj

(1 +γ t)·Norm(x t) +β t∥gt·Norm(u t)

,(2)
Rest of the decoder design follows exactly as TVTSyn. The
decoder is optimized using an objective that combinesL 1
multi-resolution mel-reconstruction, multi-period and multi-
band adversarial discriminators, a feature-matching term, and
L2F0/energy prediction losses.
4. Results
4.1. Experimental setup
Speech corpora. We train on a mixture of LibriTTS [19] and
Natural V oices EVC subset [20]. We use the LibriTTS train
subset for training and dev for validation. For Natural V oices,
we use a 90/10 train/validation split. Pre-trained speaker en-
coders are taken from SpeechBrain [21] trained on V oxCeleb
[22]. We evaluate emotion control on the ESD [3] corpus.
Model configuration. All modules are trained with
AdamW (lr of10 −4 and batch size of16). We use ReduceL-
ROnPlateau for the content encoder and ExponentialLR for
the waveform decoder (γ= 0.999996). The content encoder
and waveform decoder contain 37.5M and 52.5M parameters,
respectively, and are trained separately for 500k steps on an
NVIDIA RTX 5000 Ada GPU. The GRL coefficient is expo-
nentially ramped from 0 to 1 during training.
4.2. Emotion neutralization
To evaluate emotion neutralization, we convert expressive
(emotional) source utterances in the ESD corpus to neutral us-
ing within-speaker reference utterances randomly sampled from
the speaker’s neutral subset (i.e., source and reference utter-
ances have different content). For each source utterance, we
obtain a target V/A trajectory with the pre-trained SER model
[17], apply linear interpolation to match the duration of the
source utterance, and condition on the speaker embedding from
the source utterance. Figure 2(a) shows the V/A estimates on
original ESD utterances (one point per utterance), whereas Fig-
ure 2(b) shows the corresponding V/A estimates after emotion
neutralization. As shown, emotion-neutralized utterances clus-
ter more tightly and overlap around the center of the V/A space,
indicating effective emotion neutralization.
Objective evaluation. To quantify how effectively the sys-
tem steers emotion in the V/A space, we compute the change
(i) from source to target V/A at the utterance-level, and (ii)
from source to synthesized speech, and compare them using
the concordance correlation coefficient (CCC) for valence and
arousal. In addition, we measure intelligibility via word er-
ror rate (WER) using Whisper [24], speaker similarity as the
cosine between speaker embeddings (concatenated ECAPA-
TDNN + x-vectors), and overall quality using NISQA-MOS
[25]. We compare against three baselines, SeedVC [23], Vevo
[16, 26, 27], and TVTSyn [6].
Results from the objective evaluation are summarized in Ta-
ble 2. Our model achieves the overall best emotion steering
agreement (CCC A/CCCV) with the target V A changes among
all baselines, with consistently higher agreement for arousal
than valence. It remains comparable in intelligibility and
speaker similarity, and while NISQA is lower for TVTSyn than
for the offline baselines due to streaming constraints, we ob-
serve no significant additional degradation with our model.
Listening tests. We corroborate emotion neutralization re-
sults with a subjective A/B listening test. For each trial, partici-
pants (N=24) listened to a pair of synthesized utterances (TVT-
Syn, backbone without emotion neutralization, vs. DECRA)
and were asked to select which sample sounded more neutral.
As shown in Table 1, listeners consistently rated DECRA as
more neutral than TVTSyn for angry and happy to neutral. In
contrast, sad to neutral yields lower accuracy, likely due to sub-
stantial perceptual overlap between sad and neutral speech and
a bias to judge low-arousal speech as more neutral.
We also conducted a MOS listening test on (i) original ESD
recordings, (ii) resynthesized speech from TVTSyn, and (iii)
from DECRA across emotion neutralization and conversion.
We observe a significant drop in MOS ratings from original
speech (4.59±0.34) to either system. However, MOS ratings
for TVTSyn (3.06±0.44) and DECRA (3.02±0.43) are nearly
identical. Thus, it is the streaming nature of DECRA,and not
its emotion control capabilities, that degrades synthesis quality.
4.3. Emotion conversion
We also evaluated the ability of DECRA to perform emotion
conversion from neutral source utterances to expressive speech.
We follow the same experimental setup of Sec. 4.2, but use
within-speaker expressive reference utterances to extract tar-
get V A trajectories and guide synthesis toward angry, happy,
and sad emotions. Objective results are summarized in Table 2.
Our model improves emotion steering compared with the base-
lines, with arousal agreement being much stronger than valence,
while maintaining comparable intelligibility and speaker simi-
larity. As in emotion neutralization, NISQA is lower than the
offline baselines, which we attribute to streaming constraints.
Perceptual listening tests shown in Table 1 corroborate these
trends. Participants were asked to listen to a pair of synthesized
utterances (TVTSyn without emotion control, vs. DECRA) and
select which sample sounds more like the target emotion. They
consistently rated DECRA as more expressive than TVTSyn, al-
though conversion to the happy subspace was weaker, which is
likely due to weaker valence separability in the original V A sub-
space and correspondingly weaker valence control. Figure 2(c-
d) further illustrates these results when converting source utter-
ances into the angry and sad emotional subspaces. In both cases,
utterances from all original emotions cluster tightly in the target
V/A regions: higher arousal for angry and lower arousal for sad.
4.4. Dynamic emotion control
To show DECRA’s ability to control emotion dynamically, we
condition the model on two time-varying arousal targetsA(t)
that increase arousal linearly (from 0.2 to 0.8) and decrease it
4273
Table 2:Objective evaluation for emotion neutralization and emotion conversion.NOTE: DECRA uses a small look-ahead<80
ms, whereas SeedVC and Vevo are non-causal (i.e., they process complete utterances off-line), which explains their higher synthesis
quality. For this reason, we also include TVTSyn as a baseline, though it does not support emotion control. Moreover, SeedVC does not
disentangle speaker identity and style, which makes emotion control easier but (unlike DECRA) prevents independent control of both.
Emotion Neutralization Emotion Conversion
Method WER (%)↓Spk Sim↑NISQA↑CCC A↑CCC V↑WER (%)↓Spk Sim↑NISQA↑CCC A↑CCC V↑
SeedVC [23] 12.7 0.71 4.72 0.75 0.40 11.9 0.70 4.64 0.69 0.13
Vevo [16] 12.3 0.83 4.45 0.43 0.31 11.6 0.84 4.45 0.18 0.13
TVTSyn [6] 14.1 0.82 3.86 - - 11.6 0.83 4.11 - -
DECRA14.0 0.82 3.78 0.81 0.37 11.5 0.84 3.87 0.74 0.14
Figure 2:Visualization of valence/arousal (V/A) transforma-
tions: (a) original speech, (b) neutralized speech, (c) conver-
sion to angry, and (d) conversion to sad.
Figure 3:Dynamic arousal control with linear ramp targets.
(from 0.8 to 0.2) over time, while keeping valence constant. For
each synthesized sample, we estimate an arousal trajectory ˆA(t)
using the SER model. Figure 3 shows two representative ex-
amples. In both cases, the predicted trajectory ˆA(t)follows
the overall trend of the target ramp, indicating that the model
responds to time-varying control signals. To quantify this be-
havior, we repeated the experiment on 200 utterances and com-
puted the (per-utterance) average Pearson correlation between
targetA(t)and (i) predicted arousal ˆA(t), (ii) pitch contour,
and (iii) energy contour. We obtain correlations of 0.78 forA(t)
vs. ˆA(t), 0.72 forA(t)vs. pitch, and 0.69 forA(t)vs. energy.
We repeated the experiment for valence and obtained a correla-
tion of 0.21 betweenV(t)and ˆV(t). These results suggest that
DECRA reliably tracks time-varying arousal, consistent with
prosodic cues (pitch and energy). Valence, on the other hand, is
harder to control compared to arousal.
4.5. Speaker anonymization
Following the VPC’24 protocol, we also report anonymiza-
tion performance using equal-error-rates (EER) under the lazy-
informed attacker model. We also report WER for intelligibil-
ity and UAR to quantify emotion preservation. Since VPC’24
targets privacy while preserving emotions, we condition our
streaming decoder on the time-varying V A trajectory predicted
by our causal SER model to preserve the emotional character-
istics of the source speech. For anonymization, we generate a
random target speaker embedding using a GAN model–see [5].
Results are shown in Table 3. We compare against four
streaming VC (anonymization) baselines, SLT’24 [28], Dark-
Stream [5], GenVC [29], and TVTSyn [6]. Overall, DE-
CRA provides strong anonymization, achieving a substantially
higher EER than SLT’24 and remaining close to the other three
anonymization baselines. However, DECRA preserves emotion
substantially better than the three baselines, reflecting the ben-
efit of our causal SER model. Although SLT’24 achieves bet-
ter emotion preservation (higher UAR), it does so with much
weaker anonymization (lower EER), highlighting the privacy-
utility trade-off and DECRA’s more favorable balance. DECRA
also maintains high intelligibility with the lowest WER.
Table 3:VPC’24 evaluation results
Model WER (%)↓EER (lazy-informed)↑UAR (emotion)↑
SLT24 5.70 31.40 57.00
DarkStream 10.80 49.09 34.39
GenVC-s 8.20 48.4 34.23
TVTSyn 5.35 47.55 37.32
DECRA4.90 46.64 48.70
4.6. Streaming Efficiency
We evaluate streaming with 60 ms chunks on a GPU. Latency is
measured per chunk as the sum of chunk duration and compute
time, and RTF as compute time divided by audio duration. We
obtain 76.1 ms latency and 0.268 RTF.
5. Discussion
We propose DECRA, a causal streaming voice-conversion sys-
tem that supports real-time anonymization and closed-loop, dy-
namic emotion control by conditioning synthesis on continuous
valence–arousal (V A) trajectories predicted online by a causal
SER head, while disentangling speaker identity from emotion
via adversarial learning. DECRA is streamable end-to-end with
<80ms GPU latency and achieves improved V A-space emo-
tion steering agreement over SOTA baselines. Experiments fur-
ther demonstrate dynamic, mid-utterance control in streaming
inference, where time-varying targets are tracked by the syn-
thesized speech. One limitation is that valence control tends
to be less reliable than arousal control, consistent with known
SER difficulties and the fact that valence is often entangled with
linguistic content [17]. Future work will explore more fine-
grained emotion control using richer emotion embeddings (e.g.,
from SSL models) with explicit disentanglement from content
and speaker representations.
4274
6. Acknowledgments
Supported by the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Ac-
tivity (IARPA) via Department of Interior/Interior Business
Center (DOI/IBC) contract number 140D0424C0066. The U.S.
Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints
for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright an-
notation thereon. Disclaimer: The views and conclusions con-
tained herein are those of the authors and should not be inter-
preted as necessarily representing the official policies or en-
dorsements, either expressed or implied, of IARPA, DOI/IBC,
or the U.S. Government.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
LLMs were used only for language edi