DP-V OXLET : Provable Speaker Anonymization for Disentangled Speech
Representations
Ivoline Ngong1, Jack D’Iorio1, Hailey Schoppe1, Christopher Liberatore2, Nichole Schimanski2,
Taisa Kushner2, Joseph P . Near1
1 University of Vermont, USA
2 Galois, Inc., USA
kngongiv@uvm.edu, Jack.DIorio@uvm.edu, Hailey.Schoppe@uvm.edu, cliberatore@galois.com,
nls@galois.com, taisa@galois.com, jnear@uvm.edu
Abstract
Systems for speaker anonymization obfuscate the speaker of
an utterance, while maintaining its original semantic contents
and prosody. Recent solutions for speaker anonymization rely
on learned representations that disentangle an utterance into se-
mantic contents and speaker properties. To anonymize an utter-
ance, these systems replace the speaker properties while leaving
the semantic contents unchanged—an approach that can pro-
duce strong results on empirical measures of privacy.
In this work, we introduce speaker differential privacy, a
formal definition of speaker anonymization based on the frame-
work of differential privacy, and a mechanism for speaker
anonymization that provably satisfies the definition. In contrast
to prior heuristic-based anonymization systems, our approach
enables a provable lower bound on re-identification success rate
(e.g. equal error rate) for any possible adversary. We imple-
ment our approach in a framework that is compatible with ex-
isting disentangled representations. Compared to the prior work
on differential privacy for speaker anonymization, our approach
achieves significantly higher utility.
Index Terms: privacy, anonymization, differential privacy
1. Introduction
Systems for speaker anonymization attempt to obfuscate the
speaker of an input utterance, while maintaining the original se-
mantic contents and prosody of the input. Many recent solutions
for speaker anonymization (e.g. [18, 12, 10, 5]) rely on disen-
tangled representations: learned representations of an utterance
that split the information into pieces representing the semantic
contents of the utterance and the properties of the speaker, such
that mutual information between the two is minimized.
To achieve speech privacy, these systems leave the semantic
contents of the utterance unchanged, and modify the representa-
tion of the speaker to make the output sound like a different per-
son. For example, the team that achieved the best anonymiza-
tion results in the 2024 V oice Privacy Challenge disentangled
the input utterance into semantic, emotional, and speaker in-
formation, and then replaces the speaker information with a
randomly-selected speaker from a predetermined pool. Exist-
ing systems perform well on empirical benchmarks, but do not
provide provable guarantees of privacy.
This work introduces speaker differential privacy, a formal
definition of speaker anonymization based on differential pri-
vacy [7, 8], and DP-V OXLET , a general framework for achiev-
ing speaker differential privacy using existing approaches for
disentangled representation of speech. Speaker differential pri-
vacy provides theoretical bounds on the ability of any adver-
sary to accurately guess the original speaker of an anonymized
utterance, providing a provable guarantee independent of any
specific empirical benchmark. DP-V OXLET works by applying
a random perturbation to the disentangled speaker representa-
tion, rather than choosing the new speaker from a predefined
pool. The randomized perturbation is carefully designed to en-
sure differential privacy for the resulting utterance.
Existing solutions for speech disentanglement are not de-
signed for random perturbation of speaker information, and per-
form poorly when the speaker embedding is perturbed. To solve
this problem, we develop a differentially private variational au-
toencoder architecture to perturb the speaker embedding while
remaining in the well-conditioned portion of the embedding
space. An empirical devaluation of DP-VOXLET using the 2024
V oice Privacy Challenge benchmark shows that our approach is
competitive with state-of-the-art anonymization systems on em-
pirical benchmarks, while also providing provable guarantees.
Contributions. In summary, our contributions are:
• We define speaker differential privacy, a formal privacy defi-
nition for speaker anonymization in disentangled speech rep-
resentations.
• We describe a perturbation mechanism for speaker privacy
and prove it satisfies the definition.
• We develop DP-V OXLET , a framework for applying speaker
differential privacy in existing voice conversion systems
based on a differentially private variational autoencoder.
• Through empirical evaluation, we show that DP-V OXLET
is competitive with existing anonymization solutions that do
not provide provable guarantees.
1.1. Background: Differential Privacy
In the area of data privacy, differential privacy (DP) [7, 8] has
emerged as the standard framework for controlling privacy leak-
age when releasing data. It provides provable guarantees lim-
iting the ability of an adversary to learn new information about
individuals in the data, even when the adversary has access to
auxiliary information. In DP, a mechanism M refers to a ran-
domized algorithm that takes as input a databasex and releases
some statisticsM(x) if of the database in some abstract output
space. DP requires that it be hard to distinguish between pairs of
neighboring databases,S andS′ based upon the data provided
fromM(·), where two databases are considered neighboring if
they differ in one person’s data.
Formally, a mechanism M satisfies (ϵ,δ )-DP if for all
neighboring databasesS andS′, and for all possible sets of out-
comesO,Pr [M(S)∈O]≤eϵ Pr[M(S′)∈O] +δ.
Differentially private mechanisms typically use random
6772
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2910
perturbations to achieve this definition. For example, the Gaus-
sian mechanism adds Gaussian-distributed random noise to the
result of a database query. Our work is based on a variant of dif-
ferential privacy calledGaussian differential privacy[6] that di-
rectly bounds the tradeoff between true- and false-positive rates
for an adversary attempting to guess properties of an individual.
1.2. Related Work
Signal processing methods for speaker anonymization [15, 24,
21, 17] are generally simple and do not require any training, but
degrade speech significantly when used to produce high levels
of privacy. More recent work based on voice conversion models
has begun to explore disentangled representations [25, 9, 16].
Generally, these approaches work by extracting an x-vector
(containing speaker properties) from an input utterance using
an encoder, replacing the x-vector with a random one from a
pool of speakers [20], and generating a new utterance using a
decoder. Recent work suggests that using discrete tokens to
represent semantic content can improve the disentangled rep-
resentation and avoid speaker identity information leaking into
the semantic content [3, 2]. Our approach leverages this prior
work on disentanglement, adding a provable guarantee.
The closest work to ours is that of Shamsabadi et al. [19].
Their approach also aims to ensure differential privacy for the
speaker of an utterance. In contrast to our approach, they ran-
domly perturb all features of the input utterance, which reduces
utility by perturbing the semantic contents of the utterance. As a
result, their solution requires extremely large privacy budgets to
achieve good utility. Also inspired by differential privacy, Tran
and Soleymani [23] selectively perturb specific parts of a disen-
tangled representation, guided by a learned saliency estimator.
Their approach does not provide a formal guarantee and reduces
utility. Han et al. [11] introducevoice indistinguishability, a for-
mal definition also based on differential privacy. However, their
definition is based on metric differential privacy [4], so privacy
protection degrades with distance between speakers.
2. Formal Speaker Anonymization
Our goal is to define formal, compositional guarantees of
speaker privacy that have a natural real-world interpretation. In
our setting, we want to limit the adversary’s ability to distin-
guish which of two possible speakers produced the input to the
mechanism, based on the output of the anonymization system.
2.1. System Model, Assumptions, and Limitations
We assume the existence of an encoder ϕ(x) = (S,C ) where
S denotes the speaker’s attributes (as aspeaker embedding) and
C represents the semantic contents of the utterance x. We also
assume the existence of a decoder θ(S,C ) = x that decodes
these pieces into a waveform. We assume that the training pro-
cess assures that∀x,θ(ϕ(x)) =x to some arbitrary accuracy.
We further assume that the encoder has been trained to en-
sure that the utterance content C does not include any infor-
mation about the identity of the speaker . Formally, consider
any two speakers with utterances x andx′, where the two ut-
terances express the same contents. If ϕ(x) = ( S,C ) and
ϕ(x′) = (S′,C′), then C = C′. This separation of the com-
ponents of the latent representation is vital for our privacy guar-
antees; if there is leakage of the speaker’s attributes intoC then
an adversary may be able to identify the original speaker with
high confidence.
One way to formalize this assumption is in terms of true
and false positive rates for an adversary:
Assumption 1. Consider any utterancex spoken by speakers
such that ϕ(x) = ( S,C ), and an adversary A(s,C ) that at-
tempts to determine whether the semantic contents C of an ut-
terance were spoken by speakers. For a well-disentangled en-
coderϕ, no adversary exists which performs better than chance
at this task.
Limitations. Assumption 1 is impossible to prove. In prac-
tice, the definition of ϕ will be in terms of trained models that
produce S and C; prior work has demonstrated disentangle-
ment empirically [5, 10, 12, 18], but it still may be possible for
speaker information to leak into the contents C. When disen-
tanglement is imperfect, our approach does not ensure perfect
speaker privacy, because as speaker information may leak into
C. However, our empirical results suggest that this leakage is
minimal in practice.
2.2. Privacy Definition
Our privacy definition considers two speakers s1 and s2, and
limits the ability of an adversary to determine which of the two
spoke an anonymized utterance. It is patterned on the defini-
tion of Gaussian differential privacy [6], which defines privacy
in terms of trade-off functions. A trade-off function character-
izes the optimal relationship over a rejection rule 0≤ R≤ 1,
which rejects a null hypothesis test that the data exposed byM
came from dataset S and not S′. This optimality is derived
from the relationship between type-I errors (false positives,
αR = EP [R]) and type-II errors (false negatives,βR = EQ[R])
that an optimal adversary will make when observing outputs of
a mechanism. The trade-off T on two probability distributions
P andQ characterizes the trade-off between these two types of
errors in distinguishing between draws fromP andQ.
Definition 1 (Trade-off function [6]). For any two probability
distributionsP andQ on the same space, the trade-off function
T (P,Q ) : [0, 1]→ [0, 1] is defined as:
T (P,Q )(α) = inf{βR :αR≤α}
where the infimum is taken over all rejection rules R.
The formal definition also includes a parameter µ (corre-
sponding to the privacy parameter µ in Gaussian differential
privacy [6]) that tunes the strength of the guarantee. Setting
µ = 0 results in perfect privacy under this definition—an adver-
sary who observes an output of the system will believe that ev-
ery possible speaker is equally likely to be the original speaker.
This kind of perfect privacy is usually not achievable; instead,
we setµ> 0 (but ensure thatµ remains small) to ensure strong
privacy.
Definition 2 (Gaussian differential privacy [6]). A mechanism
M is said to satisfy µ-Gaussian Differential Privacy (µ-GDP)
if it isGµ-DP . That is,
T (M(S),M(S′))≥Gµ
for all neighboring datasets S and S’, whereGµ is defined as:
Gµ(α) = Φ(Φ−1(1−α)−µ)
and Φ denotes the standard normal CDF .
Our definition of speaker privacy extends this idea to utter-
ances and the encoderϕ and decoderθ.
6773
Algorithm 1 Gaussian speaker mechanismMG
Input: speaker embedding vectorS fromϕ(x) = (S,C )
Input: maximumL2 perturbation,U
Input: privacy parameter,µ
S′←L2clip(S,U )
σ = U
µ
ˆS =S′ +N (σ2)
Output: ( ˆS,C )
Definition 3 (Speaker differential privacy) . A privacy mech-
anismM satisfies µ-speaker differential privacy if for all ut-
terances x1 spoken by S1 and x2 spoken by S2 such that
ϕ(x1) = (S1,C ) andϕ(x2) = (S2,C ), then:
T (θ(M(ϕ(x1))),θ (M(ϕ(x2))))≥Gµ
2.3. Privacy Mechanism
Satisfying our definition is difficult, because it quantifies over
both known and unknown speakers. As a result, heuristic ap-
proaches such as selecting randomly from a set of known speak-
ers does not satisfy the definition. Instead, inspired by DP litera-
ture, we sample the latent speaker embedding space, leveraging
the idea ofL2 global sensitivity [8].
We first bound the maximumL2 distance between embed-
dings of any two speakers S1 andS2 in the latent space:∆s =
maxS1,S2∥S1−S2∥2. We ensure boundedL2 global sensitivity
by clipping: we enforce an upper bound on the L2 norm of the
speaker embedding by scaling the embedding to have a mag-
nitude no larger than a constant U. The perturbation Gaussian
noise level,σ, is computed as the ratio between the maximum
L2 distanceU and the desired privacy levelµ (soσ is inversely
proportional to µ). Effectively, this noise addition is a method
for generating a new, hypothetical speakerwho is not a real per-
son. If enough noise is used, it will be difficult for an adversary
to determine the original speaker with high confidence. The
Gaussian speaker mechanism algorithm is shown in Algorithm
1; it satisfies µ-speaker differential privacy (proof available in
the code repository).
Theorem 1. The Gaussian speaker mechanism MG satisfies
µ-membership speaker privacy.
2.4. Provable Adversarial Lower Bounds
The Gaussian speaker mechanism and the definition of speaker
differential privacy enables a theoretical lower bound on the
success rate of an adversary who attempts to re-identify the
speaker of an anonymized utterance. The definition of speaker
differential privacy is in terms of a trade-off function between
false positives and false negatives for any adversary attempting
a distinguishing task.
Viewed through this lens, the Gaussian speaker mechanism
ensures a lower bound on equal error rate (EER) for any ad-
versary based on the variance of the Gaussian noise added by
the mechanism. Figure 1 illustrates the trade-off function for
the Gaussian speaker mechanism at various settings of the pri-
vacy parameterµ. The point where type-I and type-II error are
equal is called the equal error rate (EER), and it occurs on the
diagonaly = x since the errors are symmetric. As the privacy
parameterµ gets closer to zero, the lower bound on EER im-
proves (to “perfect privacy”—an EER of 50%—when µ = 0).
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
T ype I Error
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0T ype II Error
=0.5, =2.00
=1.0, =1.00
=2.0, =0.50
=5.0, =0.20
Figure 1: EER Lower Bound, computed from Defs. 1 and 2.
For common settings like µ = 1 , the lower bound on EER is
around 35%. Note that because of the relationship between µ
andσ in Algorithm 1, whenU = 1,µ =σ−1.
3. The DP-V OXLET System
We implement DP-V OXLET , a framework for adding formal
speaker anonymization to an existing voice conversion sys-
tem. Figure 2 summarizes the architecture of DP-V OXLET .
The framework requires the voice conversion system to be or-
ganized as an encoder and decoder, and to separate speaker-
independent semantic information about an utterance from the
speaker-identifying information (e.g. speaker embedding). The
DP-V OXLET framework implements the required perturbation
for the speaker-identifying information to ensure membership
speaker privacy. Our implementation is open-source.1
Compatibility with existing encoder/decoder systems. Many
recent voice conversion systems are structured this way, and can
be easily integrated with DP-V OXLET by writing a small wrap-
per class to expose the components of the system. DP-VOXLET
is implemented as a Python library using PyTorch, and inte-
grates with voice conversion systems that also use PyTorch. Our
current implementation includes wrappers for OpenV oice [18],
NaturalSpeech3 [12], vec2wav2.0 [10], and ControlVC [5].
Writing a new wrapper requires implementing two methods:
extract embedding, which extracts a speaker embedding
from an input audio file, and inference (both noted in Fig-
ure 2), which performs voice conversion on an input audio file
given a target speaker embedding.
Synthesizing good speaker embeddings. VC systems typi-
cally represent the speaker embedding using a 192- or 256-
dimensional vector. Perturbing this vector directly with the
Gaussian speaker mechanism satisfies membership speaker pri-
vacy, but results in low-quality speech output because voice
conversion decoders typically do not generalize well over the
entire space of speaker embeddings. Instead, these decoders
work well only for regions of the embedding space character-
ized well by their training data, and produce garbled output
for embeddings outside these regions. Applying the Gaussian
speaker mechanism directly often results in an embedding out-
side a well-behaved region, and thus unintelligible output.
1https://github.com/uvm-plaid/dpvc
6774
Figure 2: Architecture of DP-V OXLET
To address this challenge, we train a variational autoen-
coder (V AE) [13] to represent the “valid” speaker embeddings
for a given voice conversion system using a low-dimensional
embedding. We train the V AE on speaker embeddings extracted
from the Common V oice dataset [1] using the target voice con-
version system. The strong regularization of the V AE objec-
tive means that the low-dimensional embedding is robust to
perturbations, since the V AE’s decoder is trained to map any
low-dimensional representation to a “valid” speaker embed-
ding. DP-V OXLET applies the Gaussian speaker mechanism
to the low-dimensional V AE embedding, then uses the V AE’s
decoder to construct the final speaker embedding for voice con-
version.
Mitigating large perturbations. Large perturbations to the
speaker embedding can produce significantly degraded speech,
despite the use of the V AE. To mitigate this effect, we clamp
each dimension of the latent representation to have bounded ab-
solute value (i.e. we enforce a limit on the L∞-norm of the
latent representation). This clamping ensures that the perturbed
latent representation will lie in the region that the V AE’s de-
coder “understands,” so that the decoder will produce a valid
speaker embedding. This kind of clamping neither improves
nor degrades privacy (since differential privacy is closed under
post-processing), but it can avoid garbled output due to large
perturbations.
4. Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of DP-V OXLET empirically, we
used the 2024 V oice Privacy Challenge benchmark [22], which
evaluates both privacy and utility. The benchmark evaluates
privacy using a speaker verification model: it anonymizes
two utterances (from the same speaker or two different speak-
ers) and then asks the speaker verification model whether the
anonymized utterances come from the same speaker. We
used the semi-informed attacker, where the speaker verification
model is trained on anonymized speech. The benchmark mea-
sures privacy using equal error rate (EER): the value for which
the speaker verification model’s false positive and false negative
rates are equal. An EER of 50% indicates perfect privacy. The
benchmark measures utility using an automated speech recog-
nition model (ASR), via word error rate (WER). A WER of 0%
indicates perfectly intelligible speech. The benchmark uses the
test split of the librispeech dataset [14] to perform the experi-
ment and the OpenV oice [18] system as the VC base method.
Our results appear in Figure 3. As the variance of the per-
turbation rises (i.e., noise levelσ, X-axis), the level of measured
privacy as indicated by EER also rises (left Y-axis). WER (right
Y-axis) also rises slightly with perturbation variance, but it re-
mains below 4%. Figure 3 is the result of a single random per-
turbation of each evaluation setting across the test dataset; the
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Noise Level ( )
35%
36%
37%
38%
39%
40%
41%Equal Error Rate (EER)
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
Word Error Rate (WER)
σ=0 σ=.5 σ=1 σ=2 σ=5 σ=10
µ=∞ µ=2 µ=1 µ=.5 µ=.2 µ=.1
EER 4.6% 34.0% 37.3% 36.8% 39.2% 41.2%
WER 3.0% 2.8% 3.1% 3.3% 3.5% 3.4%
Figure 3: Experimental Results: Equal Error Rate (EER) and
Word Error Rate (WER) as calculated by the 2024 Voice Pri-
vacy Challenge benchmark on the librispeech-test dataset, us-
ing DP-V OXLET with the OpenVoice system.
variance is due to randomness in the anonymization process.
Comparison to Voice Privacy Challenge submissions. Our
results are competitive with many of the submitted anonymiza-
tion systems for the 2024 V oice Privacy Challenge, even though
none of those systems provided provable guarantees. Out of 36
submissions to the challenge, only 6 achieved an EER higher
than 40%; in our experiments, DP-V OXLET ’s highest EER was
41.2%.
Comparison to [19]. Our approach produces significantly im-
proved EER compared to the closest related work, Shamsabadi
et al. [19]. Their results, also on librispeech (but with a different
speaker verification model) show a maximum EER of less than
20%, and require much larger privacy budgets.
5. Conclusion
We have introduced speaker differential privacy, a formal def-
inition of speaker anonymization for disentangled represen-
tations inspired by differential privacy that enables provable
lower bounds on adversary success in re-identifying speakers
in anonymized utterances. We describe a mechanism for this
definition and implement it in DP-V OXLET . Our empirical re-
sults suggest that our approach provides robust privacy protec-
tion while maintaining high-quality output speech.
6775
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI was not used in the preparation of this paper.
7. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Intelligence Advanced Re-
search Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of In-
terior/Interior Business Center (DOI/IBC) contract number
140D0424C0066. The U.S. Government is authorized to repro-
duce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwith-
standing any copyright annotation thereon. The views and con-
clusions contained herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official poli-
cies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of IARPA,
DOI/IBC, or the U.S. Government.