MCA-DCF-DS: An Adaptive Framework for Unified Diarization and
Separation with Spatial Information
Shutong Niu1,2,∗, Ruo-Yu Wang1,∗, Gao-Bin Yang1, Ya Jiang1, Tian Gao2, Jia Pan2, Jun Du1,∗∗
1 University of Science and Technology of China, China
2 iFLYTEK Research, China
niust@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wangruoyu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jundu@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
A Deep Cascade Fusion of Diarization and Separation (DCF-
DS) framework was previously proposed to integrate speaker
diarization with speech separation for handling the realistic
multi-speaker scenarios. However, DCF-DS mainly relies on
spectral cues to distinguish speakers, and its performance de-
grades in highly overlapped regions. In this paper, we first ex-
tend DCF-DS to multi-channel DCF-DS (MC-DCF-DS) by in-
corporating spatial information at the system level. We then fur-
ther propose MCA-DCF-DS by introducing spatial information
into the adaptation data simulation process to handle the trade-
off between miss and confusion errors in diarization results. Ex-
perimental results demonstrate that incorporating spatial infor-
mation at both the system and data levels improves downstream
ASR performance. Moreover, under the same ASR backend,
the proposed MCA-DCF-DS outperforms the CHiME-8 Task 2
champion system.
Index Terms: speaker diarization, speech separation, multi-
channel data, CHiME-8
1. Introduction
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) in multi-speaker conver-
sations is challenging due to overlapping speech, unknown
speakers, and background noise [1]. To mitigate these issues,
speaker diarization [2] and speech separation [3] are commonly
employed as front-end techniques. Both have proven to be ef-
fective front-ends for robust ASR in multi-speaker scenarios
such as meetings [4].
Recent studies have investigated joint modeling of diariza-
tion and separation in a unified or cascade manner. For ex-
ample, the approaches in [5, 6] simultaneously perform target
speech extraction and voice activity detection (V AD). EEND-
SS integrates multiple tasks, including diarization and separa-
tion, within a framework [7]. PixIT achieves joint training of
the two tasks in an unsupervised manner [8]. Target-speaker
separation (TS-SEP) [9] extends TS-V AD [10] by changing its
time-domain outputs into the time–frequency domain, thereby
bridging diarization to separation. Speaker separation via neu-
ral diarization (SSND) [11] leverages diarization results to as-
sign speaker identities to separated signals. In addition, the
deep cascade fusion of diarization and separation (DCF-DS)
system [12] achieved strong performance in the single-channel
track of CHiME-8 Task 2 by cascading neural speaker diariza-
tion and separation. However, DCF-DS mainly relies on spec-
tral cues, which leads to performance bottlenecks and limits its
robustness in real conversational environments.
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
On the other hand, recent front-end systems increasingly
exploit spatial information from multi-channel recordings. Typ-
ical approaches include spatial feature extraction such as inter-
channel phase differences (IPD) [13], beamforming with neural
masks [14], and spatial-aware clustering methods [15]. In the
CHiME-8 challenge, the USTC system adopted a three-stage
pipeline: initial separation and V AD, followed by separation-
based speaker diarization with spatial information (SI-SSD),
and finally neural speaker diarization (NSD) with guided source
separation (GSS) [16]. In particular, SI-SSD [17] leverages
long-term spatial clustering (LSC) with cACGMM [18] to de-
rive speaker distributions, reducing confusion (CF) errors. Al-
though this cascade framework achieved the champion result, it
still suffers from trade-offs in diarization performance. Specif-
ically, GSS-based re-clustering (RC) [19] in SI-SSD reduces
confusion (CF) errors but increases miss (MI) errors, whereas
NSD mitigates MI at the expense of higher CF. This reveals a
fundamental limitation of current spatially informed pipelines.
Based on the above background, we propose a Multi-
Channel Adaptive Deep Cascade Fusion of Diarization and Sep-
aration (MCA-DCF-DS) system. The main contributions are
twofold: (1) To overcome the limitation of DCF-DS that re-
lies solely on spectral cues, we incorporate spatial information
at the system level, extending it to MC-DCF-DS; (2) To han-
dle the CF–MI trade-off observed in the USTC CHiME-8 Task
2 pipeline, we introduce an SI-SSD based adaptation module
that exploits spatial cues to generate multi-channel adaptation
data, enabling the diarization model to reduce MI without a
significant increase in CF. Experiments on the NOTSOFAR-
1 multi-channel evaluation set, which serves as the evaluation
set for CHiME-8 Task 2 [20], show that spatial information at
both system and data levels improves ASR performance. More-
over, MCA-DCF-DS outperforms the CHiME-8 Task 2 cham-
pion system under the same ASR backend.
2. Prior Work
Fig. 1 (a) illustrates the overall architecture of DCF-DS [12].
First, the initial diarization results obtained by spectral clus-
tering (SC) are segmented using a sliding window of length
L frames to generate window-level diarization priors P(i)
W ∈
{0, 1}NW×L, where i denotes the window index and NW in-
dicates the predefined maximum number of speakers in the i-
th window. The corresponding window-based speaker embed-
dings E(i)
W and FBANK featuresX(i)
W are then fed into the NSD-
MS2S [21] architecture to obtain the diarization results:
ˆY(i)
W = NSD-MS2S(P(i)
W , E(i)
W , X(i)
W )∈ (0, 1)NW×L, (1)
where ˆY(i)
W denotes the predicted speaker activity probability
matrix, whose elements represent the probability of speaker
1396
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1539
Figure 1: Illustration of the different frameworks: (a) DCF-DS, (b) MCA-DCF-DS, (c) SI-SSD based adaptation, and (d) MC-DCF-DS.
WPE denotes weighted prediction error dereverberation. Some processing steps are omitted due to space limitations (e.g., all modules
require original mixtures as input, and spectral clustering and NSD-MS2S require pre-extracted speaker embeddings). In (b), GSS
outputs can be used for re-clustering (RC), denoted as “GSS+RC”, to obtain more reliable priors [19].
presence. For separation, we first obtain the STFT magnitude
feature A(i)
W ∈ RL×F . To match its dimensions, the diariza-
tion output ˆY(i)
W is broadcast along the new axis, referred to as
dimensional extension (DE):
ˆY(i)
W-DE = Broadcast( ˆY(i)
W )∈ (0, 1)NW×L×F. (2)
The concatenated features are fed into the Conformer-based
separation model following [12]:
I(i)
concat = Concat( ˆY(i)
W-DE, A(i)
W )∈ R(NW+1)×L×F, (3)
 ˆM (i)
W,nW (t,f )
	NW
nW=1 = Conformer(I(i)
concat), (4)
where ˆM (i)
W,nW (t,f ) denotes the estimated time–frequency
(T–F) mask for speaker nW. The window-level outputs are
then merged using overlap-mean aggregation to reconstruct
the global separation streams. During training, binary cross-
entropy (BCE) and mean absolute error (MAE) losses are re-
spectively applied to the diarization and separation modules.
The overall objective is a weighted sum of the two losses:
Loverall =λLBCE +LMAE, (5)
whereλ controls the weights of the diarization module during
training. Finally, re-clustering (RC) can be performed on the
separated signals to derive a refined global diarization prior, as
illustrated in Fig. 1 (a).
3. Methods
Fig. 1 (b) illustrates the overall architecture of the proposed
MCA-DCF-DS framework. Compared with the original DCF-
DS, MCA-DCF-DS incorporates spatial information at two lev-
els1. At the system level, the DCF-DS is extended to MC-DCF-
DS by introducing IPD features as inputs and integrating the
mask-based MVDR beamforming algorithm during decoding,
as shown in Fig. 1 (d), following [20]. At the data level, we fur-
ther introduce an SI-SSD based adaptation module and propose
the MCA-DCF-DS framework.
3.1. MC-DCF-DS
Inspired by NOTSOFAR-1 multi-channel baseline [20], we ex-
tend DCF-DS to MC-DCF-DS. ForC-channel microphone sig-
nals within thei-th window, IPD features are computed between
each non-reference channel and the reference channel, resulting
in P(i)∈ R(C−1)×L×F . These features are concatenated with
the reference-channel magnitude spectrum and the diarization-
derived time masks to construct the input for separation model:
I(i)
mc = Concat(I(i)
concat, P(i))∈ R(NW+C)×L×F, (6)
 ˆM (i)
W,nW (t,f )
	NW
nW=1, ˆE(i)
W (t,f ) = Conformer(I(i)
mc ), (7)
where ˆM (i)
W,nW (t,f ) and ˆE(i)
W (t,f ) are the estimated T–F masks
for speaker nW and noise, respectively. Following [20], these
masks are used to compute mask-derived spatial covariance ma-
trices for MVDR beamforming, which is then applied to the
multi-channel STFT features S(i)
W (t,f ) to obtain the enhanced
target spectrogram:
ˆZ (i)
W,nW (t,f ) = W(i)
nW (f )HS(i)
W (t,f ), (8)
where W(i)
nW (f ) denotes the MVDR weights. Additionally,
frame-level speaker activity probabilities estimated from indi-
1For clarity, the method is described following the sequence “DCF-
DS→ MC-DCF-DS→ MCA-DCF-DS”.
1397
vidual channels are averaged to exploit inter-channel comple-
mentarity, as illustrated by the “channel fusion” in Fig. 1 (d).
3.2. SI-SSD based Adaptation
3.2.1. Prior Generation with Spatial Clustering
In multi-channel scenarios, GSS-based re-clustering (“GSS +
RC”) can yield more accurate priors [19]. However, although
RC reduces confusion (CF) errors, it often increases miss (MI)
errors due to its weaker overlap detection capability (see Sec. 4).
To alleviate this issue, we adopt SI-SSD [17] to generate adapta-
tion data. Given the multi-channel STFT features S(i)
LW from the
i-th long window (LW), which provides longer temporal context
for cACGMM, LSC estimates the corresponding T-F masks:
 ˆM (i)
LW,nL (t,f )
	NLW
nL=1 = LSC(S(i)
LW) (9)
wherenL denotes the speaker index. NLW is the speaker num-
ber in the long window. After estimating T-F masks for each
window, we merge them across windows using overlap-mean
aggregation to obtain the global mask ˆMnL (t,f ). Averaging
over frequency provides frame-level activity probabilities:
pnL (t) = 1
F
FX
f =1
ˆMnL (t,f ), t = 1,...,L G, (10)
where LG represents the total number of frames in the entire
recording. Binary diarization decisions are obtained by thresh-
olding the frame-level speaker activity probabilitiespnL (t):
ySSD,nL,t =
(
1, speakernL is active at framet,
0, otherwise. (11)
Similar to “GSS+RC”, SI-SSD achieves low CF errors but suf-
fers from high MI, while NSD-MS2S yields fewer MI but more
CF errors. To exploit this complementarity, we use NSD-MS2S
outputs to identify overlap regions in SI-SSD results. From
NSD-MS2S results, we can derive the overlap detection result
rNSD∈ R1×LG, whose elements are defined as:
rNSD,t =
(
1, more than one speaker is active at framet,
0, otherwise.
(12)
For the SI-SSD output corresponding to speakernL, the overlap
indicator rNSD is used to filter out overlapping regions, yielding
the single-speaker prior y′
SSD,nL, whose elements are defined as:
y′
SSD,nL,t =ySSD,nL,t· (1−rNSD,t). (13)
Based on y′
SSD,nL, we construct speaker activity priors by select-
ing high-confidence non-overlapping regions for each speaker,
which provide cleaner segments for adaptation data simulation.
3.2.2. Multi-Channel Data Simulation
Assume that SnL,c denotes the set of single-speaker segments
of speakernL on channelc, which is derived from y′
SSD,nL. We
randomly select MnL segments from SnL,0 and construct the
simulated mixture via time shifting and overlap-add:
x0(τ ) =
NLWX
nL=1
MnLX
j=1
snL,0,j(τ−onL,j), (14)
where snL,0,j(t)∈ SnL,0 is the j-th segment from the refer-
ence channel (c = 0 ). Following the open-source script 2, the
offsetonL,j is set according to a pre-defined overlap ratio. The
same segment indices and offsets are applied to all channels to
generate x(τ ) ={xc(τ )|c = 0, 1,...,C − 1}, preserving the
original inter-channel spatial information.
3.2.3. Knowledge Distillation based Fine-tuning
After generating multi-channel adaptation data, we fine-tune
the NSD-MS2S model. We introduce a knowledge distillation
(KD) scheme, in which a teacher model trained on simulated
data generated from single-speaker segments of the training set
provides soft labels. Given teacher probabilities {wn,t} and
student probabilities{zn,t}, the distillation loss is defined as:
LKL =− 1
LENE
NEX
n=1
LEX
t=1
wn,t log
zn,t
wn,t

, (15)
whereNE andLE denote the number of output speaker streams
and output frames of NSD-MS2S, respectively. The final fine-
tuning loss is defined as:
L = (1−α)LBCE +αLKL, (16)
where α balances the two terms. This strategy mitigates the
impact of overlapped regions in SI-SSD that are not detected by
NSD-MS2S, therefore improving adaptation performance.
4. Experimental Results
4.1. Implementation Details
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, we evaluate
on NOTSOFAR-1 eval set, the official CHiME-8 Task 2 evalu-
ation set with diverse realistic meeting conditions [20]. It con-
tains the same meetings as the single-channel track (4–8 speak-
ers per session) but recorded with four devices, each consisting
of one central and six surrounding microphones. For MC-DCF-
DS training, we use the official 1000-hour NOTSOFAR-1 sim-
ulated dataset generated from clean Librivox speech [22]. In
addition, we employed the aforementioned open-source script
to generate approximately 700 hours of simulated data based on
near-field recordings from the released training sets. For NSD-
MS2S pre-training, in addition to the official real NOTSOFAR-
1 training set, we use 1000 hours of simulated NOTSOFAR-1
data and approximately 700 hours of simulated recordings.
In MC-DCF-DS experiments, IPD features are extracted
with a 64 ms frame length and 16 ms frame shift, using chan-
nel 0 as reference following [20]. The system is trained for
20 epochs with a learning rate of 1× 10−4, using window
sizes TW of 3 s and 12.8 s, corresponding to 3 and 4 speaker
streams, respectively. For MCA-DCF-DS, SI-SSD uses a 90 s
window, 45 s shift, and a V AD threshold of 0.2. In data sim-
ulation, 10 single-speaker segments per speaker are sampled
within each session to construct simulated utterances, yielding
about 4 hours of simulated data per session. Model adaptation
is performed for 5 epochs with a learning rate of 1× 10−5
and α = 5 × 10−3. Following the single-channel DCF-DS
setup [12], Whisper-large-v3 [23] is used as the ASR backend.
For evaluation, diarization performance is measured by the
diarization error rate (DER) [24], including miss (MI), false
alarm (FA), and confusion (CF) errors. Speech recognition
2https://github.com/jsalt2020-asrdiar/
jsalt2020_simulate
1398
Table 1: Comparison of tcpWER (%) for different front-end sys-
tems on the NOTSOFAR-1 multi-channel evaluation set.
Front-end System Training Data TW tcpWER (%)
Baseline [20]
NOTSOFAR-Sim 3s
28.28
MC-DCF-DS 21.68
MC-DCF-DS (no IPD) 22.16
MC-DCF-DS (no MVDR) 25.67
MC-DCF-DS NOTSOFAR-Sim 12.8s 20.83
DCF-DS [12] NOTSOFAR-Sim
+ NF-Sim 12.8s
31.72
MC-DCF-DS 20.61
+ Re-clustering (GSS) 20.17
performance is assessed using the time-constrained minimum-
permutation word error rate (tcpWER) [25], with a 5-second
tolerance window, consistent with the NOTSOFAR-1 challenge.
4.2. Experimental Results and Analysis of MC-DCF-DS
Table 1 presents the tcpWERs of different front-end systems on
the NOTSOFAR-1 evaluation set. Compared with the official
multi-channel baseline [20], MC-DCF-DS achieves a signifi-
cant improvement, reducing tcpWER from 28.28% to 21.68%.
Meanwhile, ablation studies show that both IPD and MVDR
effectively improve the quality of separation results. Further-
more, using a longer window leads to higher separation qual-
ity, with tcpWER further reduced to 20.83%, indicating that
longer windows benefit separation performance. When addi-
tional near-field simulated data (NF-Sim) is included in train-
ing, MC-DCF-DS achieves a slight improvement (20.83% →
20.61%). In addition, GSS-based re-clustering further refines
global speaker priors and improves performance, reducing tcp-
WER from 20.61% to 20.17%. The table also lists the results
of the best single-channel DCF-DS system. As can be seen,
MC-DCF-DS clearly outperforms the single-channel DCF-DS
(31.72%→ 20.17%), demonstrating its effectiveness.
4.3. Experimental Results and Analysis of MCA-DCF-DS
4.3.1. Analysis of Diarization Priors
Fig. 2 compares different diarization priors in MCA-DCF-DS
framework: SC, NSD-MS2S initialized with SC (SC + NSD-
MS2S), GSS + RC, NSD-MS2S initialized with GSS + RC
(GSS + RC + NSD-MS2S), and SI-SSD. As shown, clustering
and re-clustering systems cause high MI errors. Incorporating
NSD-MS2S significantly reduces MI. For example, GSS + RC
+ NSD-MS2S reduces MI by 41.2% (15.3%→ 9.0%) compared
with GSS + RC. However, it also increases CF errors, limit-
ing the ASR improvements. In contrast, SI-SSD achieves very
low CF (0.9%) but still suffers from high MI (12.8%), despite
using a lower threshold for speaker-activity decisions. This
MI-CF trade-off motivates our adaptation strategy: NSD-MS2S
is used for overlap detection, while SI-SSD provides reliable
speaker assignments for simulation, with overlapped segments
discarded during adaptation data generation.
4.3.2. Results of MCA-DCF-DS
Table 2 compares diarization systems trained on different
datasets. “Train-Pre” denotes pre-training data, and “Eval-Sim”
indicates adaptation data generated with SI-SSD priors. “KD”
denotes knowledge distillation. As shown, models trained on
“Eval-Sim” yield lower confusion errors (2.6%→ 1.7%), con-
firming the effectiveness of adaptation data. However, higher
MI in the priors introduces noise into adaptation data, result-
ing in elevated misses for the fine-tuned model without KD
(MI=10.4%). With KD, the student model achieves clear gains,
Figure 2: Comparison of different diarization priors.
Table 2: Comparison of NSD-MS2S models trained on different
datasets. The initial diarization priors are “GSS+SC” results.
Training Data Model MI FA CF DER tcpWER
Train-Pre Pre-trained 9.0 3.2 2.6 14.75 20.17
Eval-Sim Fine-tuned 10.4 3.8 1.7 15.91 18.18
Eval-Sim Student (KD) 8.2 3.9 1.7 13.83 17.86
Train-Pre CHiME-8
champion [19] 8.9 3.0 2.5 14.43 18.74
reducing DER from 15.91% to 13.83%, mainly due to a de-
crease in MI (10.4%→ 8.2%). This demonstrates that teacher-
guided KD effectively mitigates the impact of high MI in the
priors. For ASR performance, compared with the original MC-
DCF-DS, fine-tuning on “Eval-Sim” reduces tcpWER from
20.17% to 18.18%, demonstrating the effectiveness of adapta-
tion data generated with spatial priors. With KD, performance
is further enhanced (18.18%→ 17.86%), which represents the
final result of MCA-DCF-DS. Finally, the last row shows the
results3 of the CHiME-8 Task 2 champion system [19] using
the standard Whisper-large-v3 ASR model for fair comparison,
which differs from the official number obtained with an im-
proved ASR system. MCA-DCF-DS outperforms the CHiME-
8 Task 2 champion, reducing tcpWER from 18.74% to 17.86%.
Moreover, the diarization results in the last two rows show that
MCA-DCF-DS not only reduces MI but also maintains lower
CF. For computational cost, processing a 12.8 s window re-
quires approximately 66.4× 109 FLOPs, and the MC-DCF-DS
model contains about 59.91M parameters.
5. Conclusion
We integrate spatial information from both system and data
levels based on DCF-DS. Experimental results show that MC-
DCF-DS significantly improves ASR accuracy compared with
DCF-DS, while MCA-DCF-DS further enhances performance
through spatially informed adaptation. Future work will explore
more effective ways to exploit spatial information.
3Diarization priors were refined with CACGMM before “GSS+SC”,
and GSS outputs served as the final separation outputs (“sys1” in [19]).
1399
6. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China under Grant No. U25A20409.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
During the preparation of this manuscript, generative AI tools
(e.g., ChatGPT 5.2) were used only for editing and polishing,
and not for writing any major part of the manuscript. All outputs
were carefully reviewed and revised by the authors, who take
full responsibility for the final content of the paper.