Turning Speech Language Models into Multilingual Listeners
Tol´ulo. p´e. `Og´unr`e. m´ı ID 1,∗∗, Dan Jurafsky ID 1, Christopher D. Manning ID 1, Ahnmet ¨Ust¨un2,3,∗,
Martijn Bartelds ID 1,∗
1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, United States
2 Cohere Labs, Canada
3 Cohere, Canada
{tolulope,bartelds}@cs.stanford.edu, ahmet@cohere.com
Abstract
Speech Language Models (SLMs) that understand spo-
ken language questions support only a few high-resource lan-
guages, limiting access to millions of people worldwide. This
gap stems from the scarcity of multilingual speech instruction-
tuning datasets. We present MULTISPEECHQA, a large-
scale, synthetically generated and human-verified dataset com-
prising 9200 hours of 10.8 million spoken question-answer
pairs in 23 typologically diverse languages. Using MULTI-
SPEECHQA, we also introduce MULTISPEECH-BENCH, a
multi-task benchmark for evaluating SLM performance on 23
languages. We compare the performance of a cascading system
to open-weight and closed SLMs on MULTISPEECH-BENCH
and find that the cascading system outperforms open-weight
SLMs but not all closed SLMs. We use MULTISPEECHQA to
finetune Qwen 2.5-Omni, which improves its performance on
our benchmark. Our findings show that high-quality synthetic
datasets offer a cheap solution to improving the multilingual ca-
pabilities of SLMs.
Index Terms: speech language models, spoken question an-
swering, multilinguality
1. Introduction
Speech Language Models (SLMs) often combine a pretrained
speech encoder with a pretrained Large Language Model
(LLM), using a modality adapter module to map the output of
the speech encoder into the language model input space to per-
form various speech and language processing tasks [1]. These
models are trained with instruction tuning data to align the
speech encoder and LLM, and allow for natural spoken inter-
actions.
SLMs have many advantages over alternatives like the pop-
ular multitask speech model Whisper [2], including allowing
natural language instructions for speech tasks, doing question
answering out-of-the-box and enabling zero-shot performance
in a variety of traditional speech processing tasks, such as emo-
tion recognition, audio captioning or audio-based storytelling.
However, the open-weight SLMs that exist today are primar-
ily developed for English and a few other high-resource lan-
guages [3–7]. This limits access to the state-of-the-art speech-
language technology for many speakers worldwide.
The most critical challenge in developing multilin-
gual SLMs is the scarcity of multilingual speech-language
instruction-tuning datasets. While there has been significant
progress on curating such multilingual data for text-only mod-
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
els [8, 9], and vision-language models [10, 11], the intersection
of speech and language remains severely limited.
There are several benchmarks that have been introduced to
measure speech language model capabilities. These include
speech and audio understanding in AudioBench [12], spoken
language understanding with SLUE [13], long-form audio rea-
soning with BLAB [14], and safety, bias and fairness evaluation
with AHELM [15] and AIR-Bench [16]. Yet the existing evalu-
ation benchmarks for SLMs suffer from a lack of language cov-
erage, all only containing complex tasks in English, and this
lack is particularly problematic for complex tasks like open-
ended generative instruction following.
To address this gap, we present MULTISPEECHQA, a large-
scale multilingual spoken question-answering (SQA) dataset
comprising of 10.8 million instructions and 9200 hours of syn-
thetically generated and human-verified speech data in 23 ty-
pologically diverse languages. MULTISPEECHQA consists of
open-ended question-answer pairs from variety of tasks, and
data sources designed to foster instruction following capabili-
ties for SLMs in 23 languages. We combine MULTISPEECHQA
with CommonV oice [17] automatic speech recognition (ASR)
data and CoV oST-2 [18] automatic speech translation (AST)
data to create MULTISPEECH-BENCH, providing a multi-task
evaluation suite of these models in 23 languages.
Our main contributions are as follows:
1. We validate the hypothesis that automated synthetic data
generation can provide sufficiently good instruction-tuning
data to enable effective post-training of SLMs for many
languages, provided only that adequate machine translation
(MT) and speech synthesis (TTS) systems exist for those lan-
guages.
2. We provide MULTISPEECHQA, amultilingual speech-
language instruction fine-tuning dataset that consists of over
10.8 millionspoken question-answerpairs in 23 languages,
where multilingual samples are generated by using transla-
tion and speech synthesis, comprising 9200 hours in total.
3. We develop MULTISPEECH-BENCH, amultilingual,
multitaskspeechprocessing benchmark, facilitating evalu-
ation of speech recognition, speech translation and spoken
question answering in 23 languages.
4. Validating the effectiveness of our dataset, we finetune
Qwen2.5-Omni on MULTISPEECHQA and show that it
achieves state-of-the-art performance among open-weight
models on MULTISPEECH-BENCH, particularly outperform-
ing Qwen2.5-Omni with 60% win-rate across 23 languages.
By releasing our dataset and model weights, we aim to ex-
tend the benefits of modern speech technology to speakers of di-
verse languages worldwide. Our dataset, benchmark and mod-
1616
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2584
els are publicly available. 1
2. Related Work
Speech Language Models.SLMs can be broadly catego-
rized into three architectural approaches: (1) models of speech
distribution; (2) models of joint speech-text distribution, and
(3) models combining pre-trained text LLMs with speech en-
coders [1]. The third approach leverages the instruction-
following capabilities learned by the text LLM and typi-
cally requires less training data, enabling strong few-shot or
zero-shot performance on a variety of multimodal tasks [19].
Many state-of-the-art models adopt this approach, includ-
ing proprietary models, such as Gemini 2.5 [20] and GPT-
4o [21], as well as notable open-weight models, such as Phi-
4-Multimodal [7], SALMONN [6], and Qwen2Audio [4]. and
Qwen 2.5 Omni [22].
Comparing open-source models reveals limited multilin-
gual support. SALMONN is primarily trained on English data,
while Phi-4-Multimodal, Qwen2Audio and Qwen 2.5 Omni
support only eight languages. SALMONN, Qwen2Audio and
Qwen 2.5 Omni leverage a Whisper-based encoder [2], which
is aligned with an LLM backbone, suggesting potential for
broader language coverage that remains largely unexplored.
Our work substantially extends the language coverage of
these models by providing support for 23 languages with a
comprehensive evaluation.
Multilingual SQA Datasets.Multilingual SQA datasets are
scarce, limiting the development of truly multilingual SLMs.
Existing multilingual speech benchmarks and datasets primarily
target traditional tasks, rather than open-ended SQA. For exam-
ple, ASR and AST dataset FLEURS [23] and the ASR dataset
ML-SUPERB 2.0 [24] cover 102 and 143 languages, respec-
tively. For SQA specifically, V oice Assistant 400K [25] offers
diverse question-answer pairs but only in English.
We draw on recent work showing that high-quality syn-
thetic speech can effectively augment limited real data, such
as Phi-4-Multimodal demonstrated strong performance in SQA
tasks using synthetic speech from translations. Our training ap-
proach leverages this insight, while substantially expanding the
language coverage with MULTISPEECHQA.
3. Dataset Creation
Figure 1 presents our two-stage process to create MULTI-
SPEECHQA. We build upon the English V oice Assistant 400K
(V A 400K; [25]) dataset, which consists of synthesised speech
from text-only instruction-completion pairs. These instruction-
completion pairs are sourced from multiple datasets, as de-
tailed in Table 1. These include the Alpaca GPT-4 datasets,
instruction-tuning data generated with Alpaca questions with
GPT-4, Trivia datasets adapted for question answering (Trivia
single choice and Trivia multi choice), question answering
datasets created for dialogue systems (QA assistant V1 and
V2), questions and answers regarding a voice assistants identity
(Identity) and Anthropic’s Helpful Harmful dataset (RLHF).
We extend V A 400K to 22 additional languages covered by
the Aya Expanse 8B [26] model through translation and synthe-
sis, which has been shown to be effective in past work [7]. We
summarise the languages in our dataset in Table 2.
1https://multispeech.github.io
Table 1:Splits in our dataset drawn from the 470k entried in
the VA 400K dataset translated into 22 languages with number
of instruction-completion pairs per language.
Dataset Number of pairs per language
Trivia (Multi-choice, 17K) [27] 16,528
Trivia (Single-choice, 20K) [27] 16,529
QA Assistant V1 (7K) [28] 5,769
QA Assistant V2 (20K) [29] 16,008
Alpaca GPT-4 (EN, 55K) [30] 31,293
Identity [25] 4,306
RLHF [31] 379,621
Total 470,054
3.1. Translation and Synthesis
For translation, we use Seamless M4T v2 Large [32] to trans-
late instruction-completion pairs from English into the 22 target
languages languages. This model was chosen as it is publicly
available, free to use, and it achieves stronger performance com-
pared to other models of similar size, such as NLLB [33], in our
preliminary experiments.
For speech synthesis, we use different models based on lan-
guage support. We use XTTS [34] for 15 languages, as we
found its audio quality to be superior to other models in our
preliminary evaluations. For the remaining seven languages
not supported by XTTS, we use Seamless M4T v2 Large and
language-specific MMS text-to-speech (TTS) models [35]. To
improve speaker diversity in the training data, which is impor-
tant for achieving robust performance (e.g., see [36]), we lever-
age XTTS’s voice cloning capability with short LibriV ox [37]
clips of perceived male and female speakers. For each language
supported by XTTS, we randomly select a voice, which might
be male or female, from all the LibriV ox clips during synthesis,
resulting in 37 different voices across the dataset. Table 2 shows
the model assignment per language.
3.2. Human evaluation
To measure both the quality of the translations and synthesised
speech, we conduct a human evaluation for our dataset. We
sample 20 instruction-completion pairs for each language from
our dataset, and ask native speakers of each language to evalu-
ate both the naturalness of the speech and the amount of content
they have understood on a 5-point scale (1 being least natural or
least understood and 5 being extremely natural and understand-
able. We ensure that each language’s examples were reviewed
by at least two native speakers, except for Czech for which we
could not obtain any ratings.
As shown in Table 2, scores for the perceived naturalness
of the speech range from 1.8 to 4.0, and the scores for con-
tent understanding range from 2.4 to 4.9. Unsurprisingly, the
average score for naturalness (3.0) falls behind the content un-
derstanding (4.1), as the speech synthesis models often strug-
gle to generate the highest quality natural sounds in many lan-
guages [34, 35].
Comparing the models used for speech synthesis, XTTS
shows better performance than SeamlessM4T and language-
specific MMS TTS models, achieving an averaged score of 3.3
and 4.2 in 15 languages for naturalness and the amount of con-
tent understood, respectively. Results for the language-specific
MMS TTS models are 2.25 and 3.3 averaged across two lan-
1617
Figure 1:Summary of the dataset creation process. We translate the questions and answers of the Voice Assistant 400K dataset into
each of the Aya Expanse languages (in Table 2) with SeamlessM4T, synthesise the questions with XTTS for the languages covered by the
model and SeamlessM4T for the languages not covered by XTTS, leaving us with roughly 10.8 million text questions, speech questions
and text answers.
Table 2:Languages inMULTISPEECHQAwith their language families, ISO 639-1 codes, TTS model used, and human evaluation
scores for naturalness and content understanding.
Language Language Family ISO 639-1 TTS Model Naturalness Content Understood
Arabic Afro-Asiatic (Semitic) ara XTTS 2.8 3.7
Chinese (Simplified) Sino-Tibetan (Sinitic) zho XTTS 2.8 4.8
Czech Indo-European (Slavic, West) ces XTTS – –
Dutch Indo-European (Germanic, West) nld XTTS 3.1 4.4
English Indo-European (Germanic, West) eng – – –
French Indo-European (Romance) fra XTTS 3.6 4.3
German Indo-European (Germanic, West) deu XTTS 3.0 4.4
Greek Indo-European (Hellenic) ell MMS 2.4 4.2
Hebrew Afro-Asiatic (Semitic) heb MMS 2.1 2.4
Hindi Indo-European (Indo-Aryan) hin XTTS 3.4 3.5
Indonesian Austronesian (Malayo-Polynesian) ind XTTS 3.0 4.1
Italian Indo-European (Romance) ita XTTS 3.5 4.5
Japanese Japonic jpn XTTS 3.0 2.9
Korean Koreanic kor XTTS 2.3 4.2
Farsi Indo-European (Iranian) pes Seamless 2.5 4.2
Polish Indo-European (Slavic, West) pol XTTS 4.0 4.4
Portuguese Indo-European (Romance) por XTTS 3.7 4.6
Romanian Indo-European (Romance) ron Seamless 1.8 4.0
Russian Indo-European (Slavic, East) rus XTTS 3.7 4.6
Spanish Indo-European (Romance) spa XTTS 3.6 4.9
Turkish Turkic (Oghuz) tur XTTS 3.4 4.3
Ukrainian Indo-European (Slavic, East) ukr Seamless 2.5 4.6
Vietnamese Austroasiatic (Vietic) vie Seamless 3.2 2.8
guages, and SeamlessM4T are 2.5 and 3.9. Note that the lan-
guages that use MMS TTS models where XTTS does not have
language coverage are lower-resource languages such as Farsi
and Greek. These results show that our dataset is adequate for
multilingual instruction finetuning, while further improvements
will most strongly depend on improving TTS quality.
3.3. MULTISPEECH-BENCHfor Multilingual and Multi-
task Evaluation
We split the MULTISPEECHQA dataset into train, development
and test sets. We randomly sample SQA pairs of the different
subsets with the same dataset distribution as V A 400K, resulting
in a development set of 2000 SQA pairs and a test set of 1000
SQA pairs. To avoid speaker overlap, we select different speak-
ers for the train and test set when finding new voice prompts is
possible. All remaining data belongs to the train set.
We create MULTISPEECH-BENCHfrom a subset of our test
split, sampling the same 200 SQA pairs per language. To en-
sure the quality of this evaluation dataset, we collect human an-
notations on all 200 SQA pairs using Prolific, asking language
experts to review and correct the translations where necessary.
Overall, 72% of translations required editing with language-
specific correction rates ranging from 43% (Turkish) to 86%
(Chinese). This manually verified subset is combined with ex-
isting test from CommonV oice (ASR) and CoV oST-2 (ASR) for
matching languages, creating our multilingual, multitask bench-
mark.
4. Evaluation on Open-Weight and
Commercial Models
To establish the performance of current multilingual SLMs,
we evaluate leading open-weight SLMs on MULTISPEECH-
BENCHand compare it against a strong cascading system base-
line. This evaluation quantifies the performance gap between
languages and establishes baselines for measuring SQA perfor-
mance improvements from training with MULTISPEECHQA.
For the SQA portion of MULTISPEECH-BENCH, we adopt pair-
wise preference evaluations using LLM-as-a-judge, following
recent work involving open-ended multilingual generation [9].
This approach allows for consistent evaluation across our 23
languages, and is more cost-efficient than recruiting human an-
notators for each language. We use the multilingual Command-
A [38] model as our LLM-as-a-judge, which supports the 23
languages in our datasets. To check for calibration across
LLMs, we also use GPT-4o as an LLM judge.
1618
Figure 2: MULTISPEECH-BENCHcovers three tasks: (1) Spoken Question Answering (SQA), where models are prompted with speech
only (no text prompt); (2) Automatic Speech Translation (AST) from speech to English, using CoVoST-2 (X to En) for languages that
overlap with the 23 languages in our dataset; and (3) Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) on CommonVoice for each of the 23
supported languages.
4.1. Cascading System Baseline:
While end-to-end models that process speech directly have ar-
chitectural advantages (e.g., preserving acoustic information),
we include a strong cascading system baseline by first transcrib-
ing the speech with Whisper Large v3 [2], then prompting Aya
Expanse 8B [26] with the transcription.
Whisper is a leading multilingual model that supports over
96 languages and is trained to do ASR and AST into English.
Aya Expanse 8B is a language model trained to respond to ques-
tions in all 23 languages in MULTISPEECHQA. Such cascading
baselines perform often on par or exceed the performance of
SLMs on some spoken language processing tasks [19]. Our
benchmark can help us learn whether this is true for our three
tasks, even though non-cascading SLMs have many other ad-
vantages – for example, they are the only choice for performing
speech-native tasks like spoken emotion detection or speaker
identification.
4.2. Open-Weight Models:
We evaluate three leading open-weight SLMs that represent dif-
ferent training approaches and cover different languages:
1.Qwen2-Audio[39]: A speech-aware language model that
combines an audio encoder initialised from Whisper Large
v3 [2] with a QwenLM 7B decoder [4]. The modality adapter
is a multi-layer perceptron. The authors do not specify full
language support, but model performance is reported on En-
glish, French, and Chinese.
2.Qwen2.5-Omni[22]: A multimodal model incorporating
speech and vision modalities into the Qwen2.5 language
model. The processing of multimodal inputs and text gener-
ation happens in the ‘Thinker’ part of the model. For speech,
it uses an encoder that is initialized with Whisper Large v3,
and a multi-layer perceptron as the modality adapter. The
languages supported by the model are not explicitly stated.
3.Phi-4-Multimodal[7]: A multimodal model incorporating
speech and vision modalities into the Phi-4 language model.
For speech, it uses a conformer model, which is trained on
a proprietary dataset. The modality adapter is a multi-layer
perceptron. The model supports English, Chinese, German,
French, Italian, Japanese, Spanish, and Portuguese audio in-
put.
4.3. Commercial SLMs:
We evaluate four commercial SLMs:GPT-Audio Gemini 2.5
Flash, Flash Lite and Flash Pro. GPT-Audio is OpenAI’s
speech-enabled variant of the GPT family, designed for real-
time multimodal interaction. It supports speech recognition,
speech-to-text reasoning, and text-to-speech generation within
a unified model. The Gemini 2.5 Series of models provide ro-
bust automatic speech recognition and basic audio-event under-
standing.
4.4. Results
With Whisper combined with Aya Expanse 8B as the base-
line, Figure 3 shows win rates on the SQA portion of
MULTISPEECH-BENCHfor each open-weight and commercial
models tested against it with Command-A as an LLM judge.
Figure 4 shows win rates with GPT-4o as an LLM judge.
We find that Qwen2.5-Omni outperforms all other open-weight
models, and our analysis of language-specific win rates reveals
that SLMs perform better on the languages they explicitly sup-
port. Qwen2-Audio and Phi-4-Multimodal are competitive with
the baseline in languages that the models are trained on, but it is
clear that they are outperformed by the cascading system base-
line, likely due to the strength of the individual ASR and lan-
guage models on their specific tasks and the lack of catastrophic
forgetting that can occur during instruction tuning of the mod-
els to enable multimodal processing. Almost all closed-weight
models beat the Whisper+Aya baseline, with the exception of
Gemini-2.5-Flash Lite. GPT-Audio is the best performing com-
mercial SLM with Gemini 2.5 Pro closely following.
In Table 3, we show the performance of the baseline and
open-weight SLM models on ASR and AST, measuring ASR
performance using the word error rate (WER; character error
rate (CER) for Chinese (zh) and Japanese (ja)) and AST perfor-
mance with BLEU [40] and chrF [41]. Qwen2.5-Omni shows
the strongest performance among the evaluated SLM models
1619
(average ASR error rate of 49.7; average BLEU of 22.7; aver-
age chrF of 46.6), outperforming the baseline on AST. The per-
language results are mixed for both tasks, but generally models
perform strongest on the languages seen during training.
4.5. Human validation of LLM-as-a-Judge
In addition to checking for model calibration by using two
models as an LLM judge, we selected eight typologically di-
verse languages (Arabic, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Korean,
Portuguese, Turkish and Chinese) to measure whether human
judgements on SLM vs baseline pairs align with Command-A’s
judgements. Eight of 23 languages were chosen due to budget
constraints. We evaluated an open model (Qwen2.5-Omni) and
a commercial SLM (GPT-Audio) against the baseline and asked
native speakers to judge the responses. Ensuring that we had
three annotations for each pair of answers in the benchmark,
we derived a consensus label from the three annotations and
measured human–LLM alignment, observing 75.6% agreement
for Qwen2.5-Omni (κ= 0.186) and 52.4% for GPT-Audio (κ=
0.185). For GPT-Audio, annotators showed high disagreement
as the outputs are of similar quality. Overall, these experiments
provide evidence that our LLM-as-a-judge setup captures hu-
man preferences to a reasonable extent, especially for Qwen2.5-
Omni. 2
5. Finetuning With MULTISPEECHQA
The open-weight model results show the need for further model
improvement. We take the best-performing open-weight SLM,
Qwen2.5-Omni and finetune it on MULTISPEECHQA. We per-
form LoRA finetuning [42] on all linear modules in each trans-
former layer, using a rank of 32. We train for a fixed number of
steps, equalling roughly 3 epochs of the data. We then evaluate
its performance on MULTISPEECH-BENCH.
5.1. Results
Figure 6 shows the win rates of Qwen2.5-Omni finetuned with
MULTISPEECHQA against the non-finetuned Qwen2.5-Omni
model and Figure 5 shows the language breakdown of these re-
sults. We find that parameter efficient finetuning improves SQA
performance substantially. The finetuned model wins the ma-
jority of the time, struggling with languages such as Hebrew,
Greek and Farsi, where the judgements tie 48.0% of the time on
average. When considering all languages, our finetuned model
wins 60.6% of the time on average. This finetuned model also
performs best on SQA against the cascading baseline, leading
to best performance among open-weight SLMs on the SQA por-
tion of MULTISPEECH-BENCH.
Comparing the ASR and AST performance of Qwen2.5-
Omni and Qwen2.5-Omni finetuned on MULTISPEECHQA, we
find that the average ASR performance remains stable across
languages (per-language results shown in Table 3). The aver-
age WER increases marginally from 49.7 for the non-finetuned
model to 50.4 for the finetuned model. On AST, the per-
formance of the finetuned model is similarly comparable, as
shown by the slightly lower BLEU score of 21.0 compared to
22.7 for the non-finetuned model. Overall, we find that MUL-
TISPEECHQA finetuning substantially improves spoken SQA,
2The low value ofκis an artifact of a high baseline probability of
chance agreement, likely driven by a severe quality imbalance between
the competing models, skewed towards the baseline when compared to
Qwen 2.5 Omni and skewed towards GPT-Audio when compared to the
baseline.
while leaving performance on core ASR and AST capabilities
effectively unchanged.
6. How do training data mixtures affect
speech language model performance?
In Section 5, we show that MULTISPEECHQA improves the
SQA performance of Qwen2.5-Omni. These results motivate
a controlled study