The TinyExplorer Ecosystem:  
Open tools for studying infants’ auditory and visual experiences 
Cátia M. Oliveira1, Teodor Y. Nikolov1, Tamas Foldes2, Charlotte Bocchetta1, & Hana D’Souza1 
1 Cardiff University, UK 
2 University of Surrey, UK 
ferreiradeoliveirac@cardiff.ac.uk / dsouzah@cardiff.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
Studying young children’s everyday learning environments 
remains difficult because existing methods often fail to capture 
the dynamic, multimodal, and socially embedded nature of 
children’s experiences in naturalistic settings. Recent advances 
in technology, including more user-friendly hardware and AI-
powered software, are creating new opportunities to study 
young children’s everyday auditory and visual experiences in 
rich and scalable ways by utilising head-mounted cameras 
(headcams). However, the widespread use of headcams in 
research is still limited by two major barriers: (a) developing 
safe, lightweight, child-friendly recording systems, and (b) the 
time-intensive process of manual audio and video annotation. 
The TinyExplorer Ecosystem is an open-source platform 
designed to address these challenges by combining wearable 
egocentric recording hardware (TinyExplorer Gear) with 
locally run AI -powered annotation tools (TinyExplorer 
Detection App). The TinyExplorer Detection App currently 
integrates automated face detection and is being expanded to 
include hand detection, hand-object interaction annotation, and 
audio processing. Together, these tools support scalable, 
reproducible research on children’s real-world learning 
environments. 
Index Terms: child-centred technology, audio and visual 
annotation, keyword spotting, egocentric video 
1. Problem: Annotating young 
children’s everyday auditory and visual 
experiences 
Early language development relies on the ability to extract 
information from highly complex everyday audio -visual 
environments [1]. Over the last few decades, a considerable 
number of tools have emerged to record and automatically 
process longform audio [2]. However, these tools are limited in 
their capacity to fully capture the embodied and socially 
embedded nature of young children’s everyday experiences 
which are crucial for successful language learning [3]. In recent 
years, developmental science has been under going a 
transformation. Technological advances in child-friendly 
hardware and AI-powered software are enabling rich, scalable 
investigations of young children’s everyday auditory and visual 
experiences. In particular, egocentric headcam videos offer a 
powerful route into children’s auditory  and visual 
environments, capturing the people, objects, and interactions 
available to them during daily life [4]. However, widespread 
use of headcams in research remains limited by two key 
barriers: (a) building safe, lightweight, child-friendly recording 
systems; and (b) the time-consuming nature of manual audio 
and video annotation. To address these barriers, we developed 
the TinyExplorer Ecosystem (Figure 1), an integrated hardware 
and software solution designed to support naturalistic research 
on young children’s everyday auditory and visual experiences. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the TinyExplorer 
Ecosystem. 
2. Solution: TinyExplorer Ecosystem 
2.1. Hardware: TinyExplorer Gear 
The TinyExplorer Gear (Figure 1a; https://osf.io/95wvn/) is a 
lightweight headcam system utilising the Insta360 GO 3 that 
captures high-quality egocentric video data (resolution: 1080p, 
50 fps) with a wide vertical field of view (horizontal field of 
view of 80° and a vertical field of view of 116°). Whilst the 
horizontal field of view is comparable to other headcam 
systems, the increased vertical field of view (around three times 
as much as previous young children’s headcams) makes the 
TinyExplorer Gear especially suitable for examining language 
development contexts as it most efficiently captures manual 
behaviour and social agents’ face availability in natural 
environments [5]. Both of these play an important role in early 
language development [6]. 
2.2. Software: TinyExplorer Detection App 
The TinyExplorer Detection App (Figure 1b) provides a user-
friendly, openly licensed desktop interface for automated 
detection in egocentric video ( https://cardiff-
babylab.github.io/tinyexplorer-detection-app/). Crucially, all 
processing occurs locally on the researcher’s machine, so 
sensitive identifiable video data do not need to be uploaded to 
external servers or cloud-based platforms. Face detection is 
currently integrated into the TinyExplorer Detection App, and 
4467
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia

hand and keyword spotting will be integrated in the near future.  
2.2.1. Visual domain 
As a first step, we [5] benchmarked automated face detection. 
This represents an area of high machine-learning sophistication 
and clear relevance for developmental science as faces are 
central to young children’s early experiences and detecting 
them in dynamic first-person video can help quantify social 
input. We systematically evaluated 13 state -of-the-art face 
detection algorithms from the DeepFace library using data from 
children under three years of age. YOLOv11Face (M) and 
RetinaFace consistently outperformed other models in 
precision and recall, with strong concordance with manual 
ratings, lower error, reduced bias, and robust rank -order 
correlations with manual annotations [5]. To reduce technical 
implementation barriers, we integrated the best performing face 
detection algorithms into the TinyExplorer Detection App. 
Secondly, we [7] focused on hand detection, as hands play a 
crucial role in shaping children’s visual experiences. To achieve 
this, 6 open-source hand detection algorithms were evaluated, 
with 100 Days of Hands (100DOH) showing the strongest 
hand-detection performance. We expanded the capacity of this 
model to classify hand ownership (own vs other) [7]. Beyond 
hand presence and hand ownership classification, we are also 
expanding the 100DOH model to identifying hand-object 
interactions, which will allow us to examine the role of object 
handling on language development in naturalistic  
environments. These capacities will be integrated into  the 
TinyExplorer Detection App once the benchmarking process is 
finalised. 
2.2.2. Auditory domain 
In the auditory domain, w e are specifically focusing on 
keyword spotting, as identifying when and how caregivers label 
objects (naming events) provides critical insight into early word 
learning. Given that our goal is to better understand the 
multimodal experiences which underlie language development, 
we started by evaluating the performance of current keyword 
spotting tools on adult speech from naturalistic parent-child 
recordings for the Communicative Development Inventory 
(CDI) concrete nouns. By focusing on concrete nouns (485 
words), which are associated with a physical representation, we 
can build integrated accounts of the child’s real -world 
environment including speech, hand-object manipulation, and 
face availability. We are currently building a pipeline which 
combines state-of-the-art tools, including BabyHuBERT [8] for 
voice type classification, and Whisper [9] for automated speech 
recognition of adult speech during play in naturalistic settings. 
Comparing the pipeline performance against manual  
annotation, we observe a recall of 78% and a precision of 77% 
for all keywords of interest. This performance is in line with the 
levels of agreement between human annotators (70 - 100%; M 
= 82.36%, SD = 9.58). This suggests that the automated 
pipeline could be as reliable as human annotators in capturing 
the complex, noisy real -life interactions between young 
children and caregivers. These capacities will also be integrated 
into the TinyExplorer Detection App once benchmarking has 
been finalised. 
3. Next steps 
Having benchmarked hand and face detection alongside 
keyword spotting, the next practical step is to explore models 
such as YOLO26 [10] and Tarsier2 [11], which allow for the 
detection of posture, gestures, and objects in context. 
Combining these models with audio processing will allow us to 
understand who is speaking, what they are doing, and what is 
being said. Our ultimate goal is to facilitate a shift  from 
understanding isolated mechanisms to an integrated account of 
development which captures dynamic, moment-by-moment 
experiences in naturalistic environments. By sustaining an 
open-source platform with state-of-the-art multimodal 
capabilities, we aim to make the study of young children’s real-
world experiences more scalable, reproducible, and accessible. 
4. Acknowledgements  
This work was supported by a James S. McDonnell Foundation 
(JSMF) Opportunity Award (https://doi.org/10.37717/2022-
3711) and a UKRI Future Leaders Fellowship (MR/X032922/1) 
awarded to H.D. 
5. Generative AI Disclosure 
Generative AI tools were not used in the preparation of this 
manuscript.