Automatic pitch prediction from speech articulation:
Where does the fo information come from?
Beliz Ozkan ID 1,∗∗, Jonas Michael1, Thomas Hueber ID 1, Olivier Perrotin ID 1,∗∗
1 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, GIPSA-lab, Grenoble, France
{ovsev-beliz.ozkan, thomas.hueber, olivier.perrotin}@grenoble-inp.fr,
jonas.michael@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
Abstract
While source-filter theory posits independence between the
glottal source and vocal tract, empirical studies on silent speech
interfaces predictf o from articulatory data. Using a multi-
speaker dataset, we found that ultrasound tongue images alone
do enable partialf o prediction. To resolve this paradox, we
tested four hypotheses. We found no evidence thatf o predic-
tion (1) relies on a specific structure other than the tongue (or
lips); (2) benefits from increased temporal context. However,
(3) models trained on isolated utterances failed to generalise to
spontaneous speech. Most importantly, (4) prominent words
were predicted more accurately by capturing local correlations
betweenf o and articulatory dynamics. These findings, corrobo-
rated by a perceptive experiment, highlight the need for realis-
tic conversational training data and a focus on predicting local
prosodic functions—rather than replicating globalf o trajecto-
ries—to better capture the pragmatic role off o in communica-
tion.
Index Terms: silent speech interface, speech production,
prosody, biosignal
1. Introduction
Silent speech interfaces (SSI) enable vocal communication
without producing an audible acoustic signal. They capture
speech production signals—such as articulatory movements,
muscle activity, or neural signals—and convert them into an
acoustic representation of the intended speech [1, 2]. Most SSIs
rely on articulatory data, including ultrasound tongue images
(UTI) and optical imaging of lips [3, 4, 5, 6, 7], electromag-
netic articulography (EMA) [8, 9], non-audible murmur micro-
phones [10], or surface electromyography (sEMG) [11]. While
previous research has primarily focused on optimizing the intel-
ligibility of synthesised speech, the precise reconstruction of the
glottal source—particularly the fundamental frequency of vo-
cal fold vibration (f o)—remains a critical and under-addressed
challenge. Yet,f o is an essential prosodic parameter for con-
veying paralinguistic and pragmatic functions in speech. Sur-
prisingly, despite the absence of vocal fold vibration in silent
speech, several studies have demonstrated the feasibility of
predictingf o from articulatory data, comparing predictions to
ground truthf o measured on normal speech. For example, [11]
displayed a correlation of about 0.27 using sEMG with a fully
connected (FC) network, while [6] reached a correlation of
about 0.74 using UTI and a FC network with temporal context,
i.e., by using past and future input frames when predictingf o
at a given time step. [7] trained a convolutional neural network
(CNN) to predictf o from UTI, achieving a root mean square
**indicates the corresponding author.
error (RMSE) of 31 Hz, and [9] obtained an RMSE of 10.3 Hz
using EMA signals with Kernel Ridge Regression.
This empirical success poses a theoretical paradox. Accord-
ing to the source-filter theory [12], the glottal source (including
fo) and the vocal tract filter (derived from articulatory gestures)
are independent. Within this paradigm, articulatory data should
not inherently contain information aboutf o. Yet, the experi-
ments reported in the literature suggest otherwise. To address
this paradox, we step back from finding newfo prediction meth-
ods from articulatory gestures and instead investigate the funda-
mental question:why is it possible to predict (at least partially)
fo from articulatory gestures?To answer this, we first replicate
the prior work of [6, 7], focusing on the prediction off o from
UTI and lip images. We then systematically explore the follow-
ing four hypotheses through ablation studies and experimental
variations:
H1:f o information lies in the input modality.In practice,
most SSI studies [6, 7, 9] use audible voiced speech data to es-
tablish ground truth for comparison. Therefore, the measured
articulatory gestures may retain residual glottal source informa-
tion, which is absent in truly silent speech.
H2: Temporal dynamics of articulatory data map tof o vari-
ations.Micro-prosody involves segmentalf o variations caused
by the alternation of vocal tract openings (vowels) and constric-
tions (consonants) [13]. The use of temporal context in models
may leverage these dynamics.
H3: Over-fitting.Prior studies [6, 7, 9] trained and eval-
uated their models on read, isolated utterances, potentially
capturing regular intonation patterns rather than generalisable
articulatory-fo relationships.
H4: Leveraging local articulatory-f o correlations in specific
prosodic functions.Studies have shown that the realization
of various degrees of prominence (e.g., stress, broad or con-
trastive focus) is marked by both a rise off o and larger artic-
ulatory gestures (e.g., increased lip and jaw apertures [14] and
tongue movements [15]). While SSIs may only exploit these
correlations locally (e.g., at the segment or syllable level), their
cumulative effect could enhance the naturalness off o dynamics
across the entire utterance.
Section 2 presents our data, model, and training method to
replicate previous work. Section 3 addresses each hypothesis
by adapting our model, training, or testing method accordingly.
Section 4 concludes with a discussion of our findings.
2. Methodology
2.1. Model
An encoder-decoder architecture was designed for the predic-
tion off o. To tackleH1, we compared several input modalities
5424
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1288
and built encoders accordingly. The primary bimodal architec-
ture combines UTI and lip images (modelL+T). Each modality
is processed by an encoder based on [5], consisting of a four-
layer two-dimensional CNN encoder using (6,16,32,64) filters,
combined with batch normalization, ReLU activations, and max
pooling, followed by three FC layers of sizes (1000,500,200).
Each encoder produces a feature vector of dimension 200, one
derived from the lip images and the other from the UTI. These
are concatenated to form a 400-dimensional bimodal embed-
ding. Additional models were trained on either the lip images
(modelL) or UTI (modelT) exclusively, by using the 200-
dimensional unimodal embedding instead. We compared direct
articulatory measures with indirect acoustic measures, using the
spectral envelope encoded in MFCCs as a proxy for the vocal
tract response. We trained a model using 13 MFCC coefficients
(modelM 0:12), as well as two subsets: coefficients 0 to 2 (model
M0:2), which capture glottal source characteristics like intensity
and spectral tilt, and coefficients 3 to 12 (modelM 3:12), which
encode formant dynamics. For these acoustic modalities, the
encoder is a four-layer FC network with input dimension corre-
sponding to the number of MFCCs, and sizes (256,128,64,32)
to provide an embedding of size 32. For all modalities, to ad-
dressH2, the decoder is based on a one-dimensional CNN us-
ing 32 filters to account for various temporal contexts, includ-
ing: 1 frame (16.7 ms of context), 3 frames (50 ms), 7 frames
(116.7 ms), and 17 frames (283.3 ms), centred on the current
input frame. The convolution is followed by three FC layers of
size (16,8,1) to generate thefo prediction.1 It’s worth noting that
the final configurations reported above are based on a system-
atic ablation study using a held-out validation set comprising
10% of the training data. For the articulatory encoders (Land
T), we first evaluated the effect of varying the number FC lay-
ers and the number of CNN layers. Following this, a grid search
was performed to determine the optimal number of neurons for
all layers. The resulting architecture represented the best per-
formance compromise betweenLandTand was subsequently
adopted for the bimodalL+Tencoder. Similarly, for the acous-
tic encoders (MFCCs), we conducted an ablation study on the
number of FC layers, followed by a grid search on layer width.
Mirroring this approach, a grid search over the decoder hyper-
parameters was conducted to determine the optimal number of
filters for the one-dimensional CNN shared across all models.
2.2. Data
We use the TaL corpus [16], a large publicly available dataset
that provides synchronised multimodal recordings of native En-
glish speakers. The recordings include audio sampled at 48 kHz
with 16-bit resolution, UTI captured at 80 frames per second
(FPS) with a 92° field of view (64×842raw ultrasound),
and lip images recorded at 60 FPS. The corpus is divided into
two subsets, TaL1 and TaL80, both including read utterances
and spontaneous speech in modal, whispered and silent speech.
Only modal is kept here, to align with prior work and measure
a ground truthf o. TaL1 consists of recordings from a single
professional male speaker. TaL80 includes recordings from 36
male and 45 female non-professional speakers.
All modalities—UTI, lip images, and acoustic measure-
ments (MFCCs,f o)—were temporally extracted and aligned
based on the lip image sampling rate of 60 FPS, and trimmed
to remove silences at the beginning and end of each signal.
UTI and lip images were further resized to128×170pixels
1The source code will be released upon acceptance of the paper.
and normalised to the range of[0,1]. MFCCs andf o were ex-
tracted using Praat [17] with theParselmouthpython pack-
age. MFCCs use a window length of 0.015 s, a first band-filter
frequency of 100 Hz, a band-filter spacing of 100 Hz, resulting
in 39 Mel-coefficients, among which we select the first 13.f o
was log-transformed (log 10), normalised viaz-score standard-
ization on a per-speaker basis, and linearly interpolated on the
unvoiced portions of the signals.
2.3. Training set design and training
We trained 24 model conditions (6 input modalities×4 tem-
poral contexts) on 9 speaker-dependent models—one speaker
from TaL1 and 8 from TaL80. For each speaker, we care-
fully designed the train and test sets as follows. First, to ad-
dressH3, all spontaneous speech segments were reserved ex-
clusively for test sets. Second, to addressH4, we distributed
read speech utterances among train and test set based on their
prominence levels, extracted using the following procedure. Ut-
terances were first aligned with their text transcriptions using
the Montreal Forced Aligner [18], then analysed with the Con-
tinuous Wavelet Transform [19], to assign a continuous promi-
nence score to each word. Ak-means clustering algorithm
(k= 3) was applied to categorise three levels of prominence:
P0 (no prominence),P 1 (intermediate prominence), andP 2
(high prominence). From the TaL80 dataset, we selected the
8 speakers (four female and four male) with the highest propor-
tion ofP 2-level utterances. To ensure balance, the number of
training utterances for each of these 8 speakers was reduced to
match the speaker with the smallest number of recordings, re-
sulting an average of 4.35 min of speech per speaker. The TaL1
speaker dataset, in contrast, has a duration of 21.45 min after
silence trimming. Finally, for each of these 9 speakers, read
utterances were split 80/20 into training and test sets, ensuring
an even representation ofP 2 in both partitions. For each of our
24 model conditions, we first trained the model on the TaL1
speaker. Then, 8 versions of this model were fine-tuned on the
8 TaL80 speakers, resulting in a total of 216 models. Training
was performed on a Quadro RTX 8000 GPU (48 GB memory)
with a batch size of 1 utterance for 30 epochs, a learning rate
of 10 −3 with Adam optimiser, and using Mean Squared Error
(MSE) as the loss function.
3. Results and discussion
We report two complementary metrics: Spearman’s correla-
tion coefficient and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) com-
puted at utterance level between frame-wisef o predictions
and ground truth, selected on voiced frames, and expressed
in octaves. The impact of the input modality, temporal con-
text, type of speech and prominence level was investigated on
correlation and RMSE using R, with beta regression models
(glmmTMB) and linear regression models (lme), respectively.
Non-significant interactions were removed stepwise based on
Anova comparisons between simplification iterations. Post-
hoc pairwise comparisons were conducted using theemmeans
package, with significance set atp <0.05.
3.1. Effect of input modality and temporal context
Fig. 1 shows our models’ performance on the TaL1 dataset
across different input modalities and temporal contexts. Com-
pared to prior work using UTI as the sole input modality, our
modelTachieved correlations of 0.63 and 0.68 for tempo-
ral contexts of 1 and 17 frames, respectively. In comparison,
5425
L T L+T M 0 :2 M 3 :12 M 0 :12
Input/uni00A0modality
/uni00AD0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Correlation
Correlation/uni00A0by/uni00A0Type
Temporal/uni00A0Context
1/uni00A0frame
3/uni00A0frames
7/uni00A0frames
17/uni00A0frames
L T L+T M 0 :2 M 3 :12 M 0 :12
Input/uni00A0modality
/uni00AD0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Correlation
Correlation/uni00A0by/uni00A0Type
Temporal/uni00A0Context
1/uni00A0frame
3/uni00A0frames
7/uni00A0frames
17/uni00A0frames
L T L+T M 0 :2 M 3 :12 M 0 :12
Input/uni00A0modality
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
RMSE
RMSE/uni00A0by/uni00A0Type
Temporal/uni00A0Context
1/uni00A0frame
3/uni00A0frames
7/uni00A0frames
17/uni00A0frames
Figure 1:Effect of input modality and temporal context onf o prediction correlation (left) and RMSE (right) on TaL1.
[6] reported correlations of 0.71 and 0.74 under similar con-
ditions. [7] reported an RMSE of 65 Hz for single-frame in-
put, whereas our modelTachieved an RMSE of 0.21 octave
(approximately 18.6 Hz given the TaL1 speaker’s averagef o of
119 Hz). The lower correlations in our results may stem from
language-specific prosodic differences. English stress is vari-
able and influenced by multiple factors, making it harder to pre-
dict, while Hungarian–used by [6, 7]–has a fixed stress pattern,
assigned to the initial syllable of a prosodic word [20]. In a pre-
liminary experiment, we trained our model on a 46 min single-
speaker French corpus in which stress also follows a fixed pat-
tern and is weakly marked. We achieved a correlation of 0.75,
comparable to [6], supporting that language-specific prosodic
patterns may influence model performance.
H1, Effect of input modality:We now investigate the impact
of input modality onf o prediction. Among direct articulatory
inputs, modelsTandL+Tconsistently outperformed model
L(p <0.05), withTandL+Tyielding comparable results
(p >0.05). It therefore shows that if lip dynamics carryf o
information, it does not contribute to the prediction when pre-
sented simultaneously with tongue movements, supporting the
use of a unimodal input as in prior work [6, 7].
Since articulatory input was measured on audible speech
data with an active glottal source, we investigated the relative
contribution of source-related information (e.g., intensity, spec-
tral tilt) and vocal tract information tof o prediction. Among
acoustic inputs, modelM 0:2 achieved a correlation range of 0.61
to 0.84, evidencing the use of glottal information known to cor-
relate withf o [21]. Interestingly, modelM 3:12, which focuses on
formant dynamics, achieved similar performance (p >0.05).
When combined, modelM 0:12 reached the highest correlation
(0.91 in the 17-frame configuration), aligning with [22], where
fo was predicted from 16 MFCCs using linear regression (cor-
relation of 0.85). Overall, this result indicates that both glottal
source and vocal tract information contribute equally and com-
plementarily to accuratef o prediction when using acoustic fea-
tures of modal speech.
To further investigate modelT, we applied Grad-CAM [23]
to the last convolutional layer of its encoder (1-frame configu-
ration). This produced frame-level attention maps highlighting
the regions most influential for embedding vector generation.
We then computed averaged attention maps for all 13 vowels
and 9 speakers in the two corpus. Fig. 2 shows a qualitative ex-
ample. Analyses revealed that there was no consistent attention
on the hyoid bone (attached to the larynx and visible on UTI),
showing no direct use of glottal information, hence contradict-
ingH1when using solely images as input.
H2, Effect of temporal context:Similar to [6],TandL+T
models were not significantly affected by temporal context
V owel5
 V oweli:
 V owelU
Figure 2:Average Grad-CAM images for the cardinal vowels5,
i:andUof the TaL8019fsspeaker . The warmer the colour ,
the highest the attention of the CNN encoder .
(p >0.05), except for a small RMSE step between 3 and
10 frames for modelT. This suggests that relevant articula-
tory cues forf o prediction are local and can be captured within
short temporal spans (10 ms to 50 ms) without requiring the full
phonemic context, thus rejectingH2. In contrast, for acoustic
modalities (M0:12,M 0:2, andM 3:12), prediction performance im-
proved markedly with increasing frame length, stabilizing be-
yond 7 frames. Observation of predictedf o trajectories indi-
cated smoother curves with increased context.
3.2. Effect of prosodic variability in the training set
Fig. 3 displays the correlation obtained with theL+Tmodel, de-
pending on the speech type (read vs. spontaneous), the speaker
(TaL1 vs. all models using TaL80 speakers), and the level
of prosodic prominence. To achieve this, the correlation is
now computed at word-level forP 0,P 1 andP 2, as opposed
to utterance-level correlation for theGlobalcondition.
H3, Effect of speech type:We observed a strong degrada-
tion of performance when testing on spontaneous speech with
Globalcorrelations dropping from 0.70 to 0.39 for TaL1 and
from 0.65 to 0.38 for TaL80 (p <0.05). As all models were
trained on read speech, this raises the possibility that the mod-
els were over-fitted to regular prosodic patterns encountered in
read isolated utterances, confirmingH3.
H4, Effect of prominence level:Results exhibit improved per-
formance in predictingf o under strongly marked prominences
(P2), for all speech types and speakers (p <0.05). These find-
ings confirmH4by suggesting the exploitation of the coupling
betweenf o dynamics and articulatory gestures in prosodically
prominent contexts compared to non-prominent ones, as high-
lighted by [14, 15]. The increase in correlation with promi-
nence level was more pronounced for read than for spontaneous
speech, suggesting that the prominence-related articulatory-f o
coupling might also depend on the speech type.
Finally, the absence of difference onGlobalcorrelations
between TaL1 and TaL80 (p >0.05) demonstrates that fine-
tuning a single speaker model on less than 5 min of data is pos-
sible with our architecture.
5426
TaL1/uni00A0readTaL80/uni00A0readTaL1/uni00A0spontTaL80/uni00A0spont
Modality
/uni00AD1.0
/uni00AD0.8
/uni00AD0.6
/uni00AD0.4
/uni00AD0.2
/uni00AD0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Correlation
Prominence/uni00A0Level
P0
P1
P2
Global
Figure 3:Effect of speech type, speaker , and prominence level on
fo prediction correlation with theL+Tmodel.
GT L+T M 0 :12
Audio/uni00A0Type
0
20
40
60
80
100
Acceptance/uni00A0Rate/uni00A0(%)
Prominence/uni00A0Proportion
P2
P2+
P2++
Figure 4:Effect ofP 2 proportion on the acceptability off o pre-
dicted fromL+TandM 0:12 vs. Ground-Truth (GT) on TaL1.
3.3. Perceptive evaluation off o prediction
To complement our objective metrics, we conducted a per-
ceptive test to evaluate the predicted intonation. The eval-
uation focused on two primary models trained on TaL1:
M0:12 andL+T, both using a 17-frame configuration. Speech
analysis-resynthesis was performed using the neural source-
filter vocoder LPCNet [24], by replacing the analysed ground-
truthf o contours with the values predicted by our models before
resynthesis. To ensure a fair comparison, the baseline (referred
to asGT) consisted of the original audio processed through
LPCNet, ensuring that participants judged the models based on
intonation rather than synthesis artifacts. We divided the test
corpus into three subsets based on the percentage ofP 2 within
each utterance to evaluate model performance across varying
proportions ofP 2: low (0–20%,P 2), medium (20–40%,P 2+),
and high (40–60%,P 2++), with 60% representing the maxi-
mumP 2 percentage within an utterance in the corpus. By ran-
domly selecting 20 phrases from each split, we obtained 60
unique utterances, which were then synthesized under three ex-
perimental conditions (GT,L+T, andM 0:12), resulting in a total
of 180 stimuli to be evaluated by each participant. A total of 38
native English speakers were recruited for the study. The test
followed a binary forced-choice paradigm. Participants were
presented with audio samples one by one in a randomized order
and asked to judge whether the intonation was “Acceptable” or
“Not Acceptable” for an English native speaker. We agglomer-
ated the 20 binary scores per condition, prominence and partic-
ipant into an acceptance rate, and results are presented in Fig. 4.
We assessed the effect of the model and prominence proportion
on the acceptance rate using a beta regression model (R func-
tionglmmTMB), followed by post-hoc pairwise comparisons (R
functionemmeans), with significance set atp <0.05.
The results of the binary forced-choice test reveal a signif-
icant effect of prominence on perceived intonation acceptabil-
ity for all conditions. First, the highest acceptance rate given
forP 2++ in theGTcondition indicates that participants are
more inclined to globally consider an intonation contour cor-
rect if it carries local prosodic functions, namely stress in this
experiment. Then, while there is no significant differences be-
tween theL+TandM 0:12 conditions, the effect of prominence is
stronger than onGTfor both models. This suggests that in ad-
dition to the effect of the presence of a prosodic function in the
sample to evaluate, the model may have produced a more rele-
vantf o by effectively leveraging the coupling between articula-
tory movements andf o during prominent contexts. Finally, both
models are given excellent acceptance rates atP 2++ (87.5%),
which further implies that perceptual acceptability in SSIs is
more driven by the successful realization of local prosodic func-
tions than by global trajectory accuracy. Consequently, these
findings confirmH4by demonstrating that the closer coupling
betweenf o and articulatory gestures in prominent contexts is not
only effectively leveraged by SSIs, but also perceptually suffi-
cient to convey some pragmatic role off o in communication.
4. General discussion and conclusion
This study investigated the automatic prediction off o from ar-
ticulatory dynamics, using UTI and lip images. Given the com-
plex interactions between the glottal source (includingf o) and
the vocal tract filter in speech production, we explored four hy-
potheses to explain why prior work successfully predictedf o
from UTI in isolated sentences [6, 7].
Our findings reveal that UTI alone are sufficient for pre-
dictingf o with reasonable accuracy, with lip images providing
no additional benefit. Moreover, prediction off o from UTI does
not appear to rely on directly visible glottal source cues (e.g.,
hyoid bone movement), whereas predictions from MFCCs seem
to leverage glottal parameters such as intensity and spectral tilt.
Second, temporal context has little effect on predictions, indi-
cating that small CNN-based models can predictf o effectively
on a frame-by-frame basis without relying on larger phonemic
or linguistic context. Together, these findings validate current
practices in using limited-context, unimodal inputs in SSI de-
velopment, and that using modal speech to train models does
not leak glottal informati