LoRA-Tuned Large Language Models for Dementia Detection via Multi-View
Speech-Derived Features
Jonghyeon Park ID 1,∗, Olivier Jiyoun Jung ID 2,∗, Myungwoo Oh ID 1,∗∗
1 NA VER Cloud, South Korea
2 Division of Communication and Media, Ewha Womans University, South Korea
jong-hyeon.park@navercorp.com, olivierjiyounjung@gmail.com, myungwoo.oh@navercorp.com
Abstract
Early detection of dementia enables timely intervention, and re-
flecting cognitive impairment, spontaneous speech offers a non-
invasive screening modality. Conventional approaches often
focus on a single representational dimension—such as acous-
tic descriptors, pause modeling, automatic speech recognition
(ASR) transcripts, or multimodal fusion—limiting integrative
reasoning across heterogeneous cognitive symptoms. We pro-
pose a low-rank adaptation (LoRA)-tuned large language model
(LLM) that performs structured multi-view reasoning over four
complementary speech-derived signals: ASR transcripts with
pause markers, discourse-level topic cues, temporal fluency
statistics, and phonological sequences. These cues are encoded
within a unified prompt, enabling a single LLM to learn a co-
herent decision function without modality-specific encoders or
late-stage fusion. On ADReSSo, our best model achieves an
F1-score of 90.14%, and ablation confirms the complementary
contribution of each view.
Index Terms: dementia detection, large language model, low-
rank adaptation, speech-derived features
1. Introduction
Dementia progressively impairs cognitive and communicative
abilities, making early detection critical for timely intervention.
Because these impairments often manifest in speech, sponta-
neous verbal output provides a rich source of behavioral mark-
ers reflecting cognitive status. Advances in machine learn-
ing have enabled automatic analysis of speech signals, making
speech-based approaches promising and practical for early de-
mentia detection. Recent surveys of speech-based Alzheimer’s
detection systems emphasize that dementia-related speech alter-
ations span acoustic, temporal, and higher-level linguistic do-
mains, with temporal and prosodic deviations repeatedly iden-
tified as among the most discriminative markers [1].
One prominent way to capture the acoustic–prosodic
dimension is through standardized feature sets such as
eGeMAPS [2], extracted via openSMILE [3]. By aggregating
carefully selected spectral, pitch, energy, and voice-quality de-
scriptors into a compact representation, eGeMAPS provides a
robust and interpretable baseline that has been widely adopted
in speech-based dementia detection.
More recent work has leveraged data-driven speech repre-
sentations. Self-supervised models such as Wav2vec-2.0 [4]
and HuBERT [5] learn powerful acoustic embeddings directly
from raw audio, substantially improving speech representation
without manual feature engineering. However, while these
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
models capture rich contextual acoustic patterns, they do not
explicitly model temporal hesitation cues such as pause and
speech duration.
Building on these representations, WavBERT [6] integrates
Wav2vec-based acoustic embeddings with bidirectional en-
coder representations from transformers (BERT)-based [7] tex-
tual representations and further incorporates connectionist tem-
poral classification (CTC) [8]-derived pause-duration features.
This combination demonstrates that augmenting strong self-
supervised speech embeddings with explicit temporal modeling
yields improved performance for Alzheimer’s dementia detec-
tion. Phoneme-level representations have also been explored
to model segmental variations in dementia speech, showing that
incorporating phonological information can further enhance de-
tection performance [9].
Large-scale automatic speech recognition (ASR) models
have also been used as transferable backbones. Whisper [10], a
state-of-the-art ASR model, produces robust transcriptions for
spontaneous speech and has become a strong backbone for clin-
ical speech tasks. Improved transcription fidelity has been as-
sociated with stronger downstream dementia detection perfor-
mance [11]. Several studies have explored leveraging Whis-
per’s multilingual capability to extend dementia detection mod-
els beyond English, enabling cross-lingual clinical speech anal-
ysis and improving generalizability across languages [12].
With the emergence of large language models (LLMs), re-
cent studies have explored their potential for transcript-level
dementia detection. These approaches often leverage prompt-
ing strategies, such as prompt engineering and chain-of-thought
prompting, to exploit the reasoning capabilities of LLMs [13,
14, 15].
Despite these advances, most existing systems model these
signals independently or combine them through separate en-
coders prior to aggregation. Such designs limit integrative rea-
soning, as dementia-related impairment manifests jointly across
complementary speech dimensions.
In this work, we propose a framework that adapts an
LLM via low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [16] to jointly rea-
son over complementary speech-derived representations en-
coded in a structured prompt. Lexical transcripts augmented
with alignment-derived pause markers, temporal fluency indi-
cators from forced alignment, phonological sequences from a
disfluency-aware phoneme recognizer [17], and discourse-level
topic and cluster cues are unified within a single input repre-
sentation. Experiments on ADReSSo [18] show that structured
multi-view reasoning with parameter-efficient LLM adaptation
provides a strong and unified framework for dementia detection.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a unified multi-view speech-derived feature
framework for dementia detection, leveraging a LoRA-tuned
3631
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-952
Speech
Utterance
Whisper
MFA --.XJUI-P3"Pause & duration
calculaUJPO
Topic extraction
AD / CN
Instructions for topic extraction
Phoneme 
recognizer
!
Topic with cluster
Pause & duration
Phoneme sequence
ASR Transcript
Figure 1:Schematic diagram of proposed pipeline.
LLM to jointly reason over heterogeneous representations
within a structured prompt.
• We show that integrating lexical, temporal, phonological,
and discourse-level cues within a single reasoning framework
yields consistent improvements over single-view and inde-
pendently modeled baselines.
2. Methods
2.1. Overview
We present a framework that trains an LLM using LoRA [16]
for speech-based dementia detection that integrates multi-view
speech-derived features within a structured prompt. Our hy-
pothesis is that dementia-related impairment manifests across
complementary dimensions of speech, and that a single LLM
can effectively learn to detect these cues when they are encoded
within a unified representation.
Instead of relying on separate models or conventional fu-
sion pipelines, we incorporate heterogeneous speech-derived
indicators into a structured prompt format. The LoRA-adapted
LLM then performs reasoning over both sequential patterns and
global summary features to produce a unified clinical predic-
tion. An overview of the proposed pipeline is illustrated in Fig-
ure 1.
2.2. Multi-View Feature Extraction
For each utterance, we derive four complementary speech-
derived representations and encode them into a single structured
input for LLM fine-tuning.
2.2.1. Lexical Representation
We generate lexical transcripts using Whisper [10] large-v3,
a transformer-based encoder-decoder ASR model pre-trained
on large-scale weakly supervised audio data. Its robustness to
spontaneous and disfluent speech is well suited for dementia
corpora, where hesitations, repetitions, and incomplete utter-
ances are common.
2.2.2. Temporal Fluency Representation
We derive temporal fluency indicators from word-level forced
alignment using Montreal Forced Aligner (MFA) [19], which
provides more reliable word boundaries than Whisper’s word-
level timestamps. From the aligned inter-word silence inter-
vals, we compute utterance-level features, including speech rate
(words per second), mean pause duration, and pause counts.
To determine the optimal pause threshold, we conduct
Table 1:Effect-size-based temporal fluency comparison be-
tween AD and CN groups. Pause duration is analyzed across
clinically relevant thresholds.
Metric AD Mean CN Mean Diff Cohen’sd
Pause Threshold Analysis
≥0.3s 1.2518 0.9459 +0.3058 0.253
≥0.5s 1.5544 1.1828 +0.3716 0.282
≥1.0s 2.2164 1.8476 +0.3688 0.230
≥1.5s 2.9638 2.5946 +0.3692 0.195
Speech Rate
Words per second 2.90 3.08−0.18−0.125
an effect-size analysis comparing the Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) and cognitively normal (CN) groups in the ADReSSo
dataset [18] (Table 1). The 0.5-second threshold yields the
strongest group separation (Cohen’sd= 0.282), while shorter
thresholds reduce discriminative power as brief pauses are com-
mon in normal speech. Speech rate shows a comparatively mod-
est effect (d=−0.125); however, it captures a complemen-
tary aspect of temporal fluency reflecting global speech tempo,
whereas pause-related features primarily characterize hesitation
patterns. We therefore adopt 0.5s as the operational threshold,
applied consistently to both the numerical fluency features and
the<pause>token insertion in the lexical stream.
2.2.3. Discourse-Oriented Representation
The ADReSSo dataset [18] uses the Cookie Theft picture de-
scription task [20], in which all participants describe the same
visual scene. This shared stimulus enables direct comparison of
discourse patterns across speakers, making deviations in con-
tent coverage or narrative coherence interpretable as markers of
cognitive impairment.
To capture discourse organization beyond surface lexical
features, we define a fixed set of eight semantic clusters us-
ing a vision-capable LLM (GPT-5.2 [21]). The model identifies
groupings that are (i)spatially grounded, reflecting regions and
objects in the scene; (ii)thematically coherent, capturing related
actions and entities; and (iii)discourse-aware, including cate-
gories for meta-cognitive processes. Each cluster is further sub-
divided into fine-grained topics representing specific elements
that speakers commonly mention.1
Utterance labeling is performed separately from defining
the set of clusters. Given the fixed scheme, we assign each ut-
terance a cluster and topic label via zero-shot inference with a
text-based LLM [21], providing the transcript and cluster defini-
tions as input. These labels are then encoded into the multi-view
representation.
2.2.4. Phonological Representation
Phonological sequences are extracted using HuPER [17], a
human-inspired phoneme recognizer designed to remain ro-
bust under degraded and disfluent speech. Unlike conventional
phoneme extraction pipelines that rely primarily on bottom-up
acoustic evidence, HuPER employs an adaptive inference strat-
egy that leverages top-down linguistic constraints when acous-
tic cues are weak or ambiguous—conditions frequently ob-
served in dementia speech.
1The details are provided in https://github.com/vivivic/is26dementia.
3632
Table 2:Discourse cluster scheme for Cookie Theft picture de-
scription.
Cluster Attentional Zone Constituent Topics
C1 Boy & Cabinet Action boy on stool, reaching up, cookie jar,
taking cookie, stool balance, cabinet shelf,
open cabinet
C2 Girl Participation girl reaching, asking for cookie,
standing left, watching boy
C3 Mother & Domestic Activity mother drying, holding plate, dish towel,
ignoring children, kitchen apron
C4 Water Overflow Event overflowing sink, running faucet,
water spilling, puddle on floor,
water splash
C5 Counter Objects countertop items, plate on counter,
cup and saucer, stacked dishes
C6 Window & Exterior window view, curtains, outside scene
C7 Room Layout & Setting kitchen setting, cabinets drawers,
sink area, floor space
C8 Meta-discourse uncertainty, self correction, meta filler,
retrieval difficulty, off topic,
task management
In addition, HuPER’s WFST-based decoding further im-
proves the stability of phoneme recognition under disfluency
and articulation variability, producing consistent ARPAbet-
style outputs. As a result, the extracted phonological sequences
preserve articulatory and fluency-related information beyond
lexical content, providing a complementary diagnostic signal
for LLM-based dementia classification.
2.3. Classification Model and Training
We adopt several open-source LLMs such as Qwen3 [22] and
Gemma-3 [23] and fine-tune via LoRA [16] for utterance-
level binary dementia classification. LoRA enables parameter-
efficient adaptation of the large-scale model while preserv-
ing the pretrained representations, which is particularly impor-
tant given the limited size of dementia speech corpora. The
instruction-following capability of LLMs enables effective rea-
soning over the structured multi-view prompt, allowing the
model to jointly interpret lexical, temporal, phonological, and
discourse-level cues within a single inference pass.
2.4. Structured Multi-View Prompt
The four feature views are unified into a single JSON-structured
prompt per utterance. As illustrated in Figure 2, each field
directly corresponds to one representational level:speech
carries the Whisper [10] ASR transcript augmented with in-
line<pause>tokens;clusterandtopicencode the dis-
course label derived from the LLM-based annotation pipeline;
num pause,mean pause sec, andwords per second
summarize global temporal fluency; andphonemeprovides
the ARPAbet phoneme sequence from HuPER [17].
3. Experiments
3.1. Datasets
We evaluate our approach on the ADReSSo challenge
dataset [18], which is a widely used benchmark for speech-
based dementia detection. The dataset is derived from the De-
mentiaBank Pitt corpus [24] and is based on the Cookie Theft
picture description task. ADReSSo is a transcript-free chal-
lenge supplying only raw audio with speaker-level binary la-
bels for 237 participants (166 train, 71 test). The dataset fea-
tures balanced class distributions to enable unbiased evaluation.
For utterance segmentation, we use the speaker-turn boundaries
{
"utterance": {
"speech": "theres a pathway <pause> with ...
"cluster": "C6",
"topic": "window_curtains_outside",
"num_pause": 1,
"mean_pause_sec": 0.69,
"words_per_second": 1.713,
"phoneme": "EH ER Z DH AH P AE TH W EY W...
}
}
Figure 2:Example of structured multi-view prompt for a single
utterance from the ADReSSo dataset. Each field encodes a dis-
tinct representational view.
provided by the ADReSSo challenge and restrict training and
evaluation to participant turns only, discarding interviewer ut-
terances.
3.2. Feature Implementation
We extracted input features following the protocols in section
2. Lexical transcripts were first generated using Whisper [10]
large-v3. These transcripts were then used as input to MFA [19]
to obtain word-level forced alignments. Based on the align-
ment results, silence intervals of≥0.5s were identified and en-
coded as inline<pause>tokens within the transcript. Tempo-
ral fluency statistics (e.g., words/sec and pause count/duration)
were also derived from the MFA alignments. Discourse labels
were assigned via zero-shot inference with an LLM using the
fixed cluster scheme, and ARPAbet phoneme sequences were
extracted using HuPER [17]. These views were aggregated into
the JSON-structured prompt for each utterance.
3.3. Experimental Setup
All models are fine-tuned from LLM checkpoints using the
AdamW [25] optimizer with a cosine learning rate schedule,
learning rate of1×10 −4 and linear warm-up over the first 10%
of steps. LoRA [16] is applied with rankr= 8,α= 16to the
query and value projection matrices. We use participant turns
as utterance units, following the timestamp-based segmentation
provided by the dataset, and discard interviewer turns. Speaker-
level predictions are aggregated via majority voting (dementia if
more than half of the per-utterance predictions indicate demen-
tia). Results are presented in terms of macro-averaged F1-score
on the held-out test set.
4. Results
4.1. Main Results
Table 3 compares our system with representative published ap-
proaches on ADReSSo [18]. Prior systems emphasize different
categories of speech-derived features, including temporal hesi-
tation patterns, transcription fidelity, and multimodal fusion.
The challenge baseline [18] relies on conventional acous-
tic descriptors derived from the eGeMAPS [2] feature set.
WavBERT [6] extends self-supervised acoustic embeddings
with explicit pause-duration modeling, highlighting the diag-
nostic relevance of temporal hesitation cues. The Whisper-
based system [11] leverages a large-scale ASR backbone to ob-
tain high-quality transcripts and speech representations, demon-
strating that improved transcription fidelity can strengthen
downstream diagnostic signals. Swin-BERT [26] further ad-
3633
Table 3:Speaker-level F1-score (%) on the ADReSSo test set.
System F1-score
Other published systems
Challenge baseline [18] 78.92
WavBERT [6] 83.10
Whisper-based [11] 84.50
Swin-BERT [26] 87.32
Ours (multi-view LoRA)
Qwen3-4B 85.66
Qwen3-8B 88.73
Gemma3-12B-it 88.72
Qwen3-14B90.14
vances performance through a multimodal late-fusion architec-
ture that combines separate audio and text encoders, represent-
ing the strongest prior system on this benchmark.
Our framework integrates heterogeneous multi-view speech
cues spanning duration-, phonological-, transcript-, and
discourse-level information within a unified structured prompt.
Despite its architectural simplicity, the model achieves the best
performance on ADReSSo, surpassing the strongest prior sys-
tem by a clear margin. Our approach consolidates speech-
derived features into a unified reasoning process, enabling
effective modeling through a single-pass inference without
modality-specific encoders or late-stage feature aggregation.
To examine the role of model capacity, we further evaluate
several smaller backbones. Performance improves consistently
with model scale, suggesting that larger LLMs are better able to
capture interactions among heterogeneous clinical cues. Nev-
ertheless, even smaller models remain competitive with previ-
ously reported systems, indicating that the proposed multi-view
reasoning framework is effective across a broad range of model
sizes.
4.2. Ablation Study
Table 4 reports a stepwise ablation study of our proposed model
on ADReSSo. Starting from a speech-transcription-only base-
line (81.48% F1-score), each additional view yields a consis-
tent improvement. Topic and cluster labels (+Topic & clus-
ter, +5.81%) provide the largest performance gain, highlight-
ing the importance of discourse-level cues for dementia detec-
tion. By assigning each utterance to a predefined cluster and
topic, the model obtains explicit signals about its semantic focus
(e.g., scene content versus meta-discourse), allowing the model
to better leverage discourse patterns characteristic of impaired
descriptions. Temporal fluency statistics (+ Pause / duration,
+1.44%) provide complementary global signals that augment
the inline<pause>tokens. While pause tokens capture lo-
cal disfluency patterns within the transcription, aggregated du-
ration features summarize broader temporal characteristics such
as speech rate and pause distribution, enabling the LLM to rea-
son over higher-level fluency patterns beyond sequential con-
text. Phoneme sequences (+Phoneme, +1.41%) capture sub-
lexical articulatory patterns that are complementary to lexical
content. These signals provide evidence of phonological irreg-
ularities that may not surface at the word level, confirming that
phonological information contributes diagnostic value beyond
transcript-based representations alone.
Table 4:Ablation study on feature contributions (ADReSSo,
speaker-level F1-score (%)).
Feature set F1-score
Speech transcription only 81.48
+ Topic & cluster 87.29
+ Pause / duration† 88.73
+ Phoneme90.14
† number of pauses, mean pause duration, words per
second,<pause>tokens.
5. Conclusion
We presented a LoRA [16]-tuned LLM framework for demen-
tia detection that unifies four complementary speech-derived
views—lexical transcripts, discourse-level cues, temporal flu-
ency statistics, and phonological sequences—within a single
structured prompt. Ablation experiments on ADReSSo confirm
that each view contributes incremental diagnostic value, with
discourse clusters providing the largest individual gain.
Performance scales consistently with model capacity (4B
to 14B). Notably, even smaller models remain competitive with
prior systems, suggesting that the multi-view formulation it-
self—rather than parameter scale alone—drives the observed
improvements.
Overall, our results demonstrate that structured multi-view
reasoning with parameter-efficient LLM adaptation offers a uni-
fied alternative to existing pipelines that rely on separate en-
coders or late-stage fusion. However, this study has several lim-
itations. Extracting discourse-oriented representations relies on
models accessed via commercial APIs, which restricts full con-
trol over the underlying training process. In addition, our eval-
uation is conducted only on English datasets, which may limit
generalizability to other languages. Future work will extend
this framework to multilingual benchmarks such as ADReSS-
M [27] and explore improving generalization by scaling-up both
training corpora and model parameters.
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
We used generative AI to extract the discourse-oriented repre-
sentation described in Section 2.2.3. GPT-5.2 [21] was consis-
tently used for this extraction, and the instructions are provided
in https://github.com/vivivic/is26dementia. Additionally, the
core module for dementia detection, the LoRA-tuned LLM, is
itself a generative AI model. We experimented with Qwen3 [22]
and Gemma-3 [23] as base models.