Audio-Visual Feature Reconstruction Pretraining for Noise-Robust Emotion
Recognition
Ivan Halim Parmonangan ID 1,∗, Tharindu Fernando ID 1,∗,∗∗, Simon Denman ID 1
1 Queensland University of Technology, Australia
ivanhalim.parmonangan@hdr.qut.edu.au, t.warnakulasuriya@qut.edu.au, s.denman@qut.edu.au
Abstract
Audiovisual emotion recognition fuses speech and facial ex-
pressions, yet real-world corruption such as background noise,
reverberation, and dropped/frozen frames, can make the fusion
fragile. A degraded input may dominate attention and suppress
the clean input. Prior audiovisual pretraining solutions primar-
ily optimize cross-modal alignment which can lose input de-
tails and often rely on Transformers, where the quadratic cost
hinders long sequences. We propose a Mamba2 state-space
fusion network with a self-supervised denoising pretraining
stage, where clean features are reconstructed from corrupted au-
dio–visual inputs only during pretraining to learn noise-robust
representations. When applied to a downstream emotion recog-
nition task, the proposed multimodal feature-reconstruction pre-
trained model delivers improvements under noisy audio and
consistent gains over unimodal feature-reconstruction pretrain-
ing across diverse noisy/clean video settings, demonstrating im-
proved robustness with efficient sequence modeling.
Index Terms: speech recognition, human-computer interac-
tion, computational paralinguistics
1. Introduction
Emotions shape human interactions through body language, fa-
cial expressions, vocal, and textual cues [1]. In daily life, fa-
cial expression and speech stand apart from other modes due
to their intrinsic connection [2] and complementary nature [3].
Many studies have exploited this, and shown that incorporating
audio and visual inputs for emotion recognition can increase
emotion recognition accuracy [4, 5, 6, 7], most recently via
cross-attention-based fusion mechanisms [8, 9].
In recent years, emotion recognition has been adopted in
applications such as healthcare, customer service, education,
and entertainment [10, 11, 12, 13]. Current emotion recognition
systems can analyze and generate emotional responses, allow-
ing machines to more meaningfully engage in human-computer
interactions. However, in real-world conditions one or both
modalities may be degraded, leading to a significant decline
in performance [8]. Existing fusion approaches [8, 9] typi-
cally assume that input modalities are reliable, and in such sce-
narios the noise-affected features from one mode may disrupt
clean features from the second, resulting in a decline in emo-
tion recognition results despite the clean input [14, 15].
While recent self-supervised audio–visual pretraining
methods primarily focus on semantic correspondence, synchro-
nization, or contrastive alignment across modalities to improve
general representation quality, the lack of explicit cross-modal
denoising limits robustness when transferring to affective tasks
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
operating under real-world noise conditions [16, 17]. In addi-
tion, most existing methods rely on Transformer-based architec-
tures, which have quadratic complexity, restricting scalability
and noise-handling efficiency in long multi-modal sequences.
Based on these limitations, we investigate whether ex-
plicitly denoising noisy audio and visual features in a multi-
modal pretraining setting can improve robustness to noisy au-
dio while preventing noise-sensitive modalities from degrading
more noise-robust modes. We propose a Mamba2-based mul-
timodal fusion framework with cross-attention reconstruction
pretraining, which leverages state-space sequence modeling for
efficient temporal processing and learns modality-conditioned
denoising from corrupted audiovisual inputs.
The proposed approach is evaluated on an emotion recog-
nition task by introducing realistic corruptions to audio and
video modes, including background noise, room reverberation,
chopped speech, and frozen frames. By varying corruption lev-
els beyond those seen during pretraining, the model’s ability
to maintain emotion recognition performance under both lower
and higher noise conditions can be assessed.
2. Datasets
The main datasets used in this study are Lip Reading Sentences
2 (LRS2) [18], and the Ryerson Audio-Visual Database of Emo-
tional Speech and Song (RA VDESS)[19]. The former is used
during model pretraining, while the latter is used to evaluate
emotion recognition performance in the presence of noise and
corruption. We use three different background noise and im-
pulse response datasets to avoid overlap between pretraining
and downstream settings, while simulating real-world corrup-
tion. For background noise, we use FSDNoisy18K [20], WSJ0
Hipster Ambient Mixtures (WHAM!) [21], and UrbanSound8K
[22]. To simulate reverberation we use the IR-C4DM [23],
Aachen Impulse Response (AIR) [24, 25], and Microphone Im-
pulse Response Project (MicIRP) [26] datasets.
2.1. Self-supervised Reconstruction Pretraining Dataset
The LRS2 dataset contains thousands of spoken sentences taken
from BBC television broadcasts. Each sample contains a syn-
chronized audio-video record. Video is cropped around the
speaker’s face and mouth, while the audio contains the corre-
sponding speech. It captures natural speech with variations in
lighting, pose, background noise, and speaking style.
LRS2 consists of pretrain and main subsets, which contain
more than96,000and48,000records respectively. Originally,
the pretrain subset is intended for pretraining, while the main
subset (which itself contains train, validation, and test sets) is
intended for the datasets own supervised downstream task. In
this study, we used the pretraining set to pretrain the proposed
model in a self-supervised fashion, while the whole main subset
is used for validation during pretraining.
1822
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-605
2.2. Emotion Recognition Dataset
To evaluate the proposed method, we used RA VDESS.
RA VDESS consists of audio-only samples, video-only samples,
and audio-video samples, and is performed by 24 actors (12 fe-
male and 12 male) aged 21-33 years. All actors speak English as
their first language and talk in a neutral North American accent.
There are 8 emotion classes in the dataset: happy, sad, angry,
fearful, surprise, disgust, calm, and neutral. All emotions are
performed at normal and strong intensities (though there is no
strong intensity for the neutral emotion). There are only two
sentences spoken: “Kids are talking by the door” and “Dogs
are sitting by the door”. The statements are seven syllables
in length and were matched in word frequency and familiarity.
Each sentence is spoken as a normal sentence and sung (one ac-
tor does not have sung-sentences records). Of the 24 actors, one
actor only has 60 records while the rest have 104 records for the
audio-only, video-only, and audio-video conditions.
3. Methodology
This section describes the key components of this work. First,
we describe how noise is injected into clean audio and video,
after which we outline the feature extraction process. Lastly, the
architecture of the proposed model, including the pretraining
and downstream evaluation processes, are presented.
3.1. Data Augmentation
We augment the audio and video with noise and other corrup-
tions to simulate real-world conditions. We consider two groups
of corruption: source corruption (applied first), and transmis-
sion corruption. Source corruption includes background noise
and room reverberation. Transmission corruption includes bi-
trate drop, clipped audio, and chopped speech.
3.1.1. Audio Augmentation
Audio corruptions are set randomly for each sample with the
following probabilities: Background noise0.4, reverberation
0.2, bit-depth drop0.2, sound-clipping0.2, choppy-effect0.2.
Background noise is added to samples at a level of 5-20 dB.
Room reverberation (intensity set randomly between0.1−0.5)
is applied by adding the original audio with a normalized wave-
form convolved with the impulse-response. For chopped speech
effects, we uniformly randomly select from dropout, stutter,
and packet-loss effects. Dropout overwrites random segments
of10ms−1swith zeros with random chance between0.01
to0.1throughout the sample. Stutter copies a short segment
to several consecutive segments (stutter length randomly set to
100ms−2s). Packet loss copies a 20 ms clip which is repeated
throughout the signal. For each segment, dropout is applied ran-
domly, with a random chance of a sped-up signal at1.5−2
times the original speed to the end of the segment. Bit-depth
drop is done by randomly setting the bit-depth to between 4-
24 bits throughout the sample (original bit-depth is 16-32 bit).
Clipping clamps the maximum value of the waveform.
For pretraining, the pre-train subset of LRS2 is aug-
mented with the FSDNoisy18K noise dataset and AIR impulse-
response dataset. The validation data for the pretraining stage
used themainsubset of LRS2 dataset augmented with the
WHAM! background noise dataset and IR-C4DM impulse-
response dataset. For the downstream task, the RA VDESS au-
dio data is augmented using UrbanSound8K background noise
dataset and MicIRP impulse-response dataset.
3.1.2. Video Augmentation
Each video frame is corrupted randomly with the following
probabilities: frozen frames0.3, compression artifact0.2, color
distortion0.15, blur0.15, frame tearing0.1, and noise0.1.
Each frame is handled individually and the corruptions ex-
cept for frozen, tearing, and noise are done in patches (patches
are randomly sampled and sized between50−150pixels
square). Frozen frame corruption copies a frame to the next
5−10consecutive frames. Frame tearing is applied vertically
or horizontally at two random locations per frame. Noise is ap-
plied by adding gaussian noise with0.05intensity to the whole
frame. Compression artifacts drop the quality of1−5patches
up to 30% of the original quality. Color distortion shifts the hue,
saturation, and value (HSV) of1−3patches per frame. Hue
is shifted±30, while the saturation and value are shifted±50.
Blurring applies Gaussian blur to1−3patches per frame.
3.2. Feature Extraction
We use EAT-base [27] (pre-trained for 30-epochs on AudioSet-
2M[28]) with a ViT-B backbone to extract audio features; and a
Kinetics-400 [29] pretrained Timesformer[30] base-size model
for video 1. Synthetic corruption is done at the raw signal-level
identically across all compared methods. EAT and Timesformer
are used only to extract latent features from clean and corrupted
signals, and are hence kept frozen. The proposed reconstruction
operates only on the resulting representations.
Audio is resampled to 16 kHz and converted to mono, then
transformed to a 128 frequency-bins Mel-spectrogram with a
Hanning window of 25 ms, and 10 ms shift. Video samples are
recorded at 25 fps. Frames are sampled from videos at 2 Hz or
greater. To determine the number of frames sampled, the video
length (in frames) is divided by12.5and rounded to the near-
est8, and this number of frames are uniformly sampled. This
ensures that for short videos (less than4s)8frames are uni-
formly sampled, while longer videos will sample more frames,
such that video is not undersampled relative to the audio.
3.3. Pretraining
For pretraining, we use the LRS2pretrainsubset while themain
subset is used for validation. The proposed and downstream
architectures are shown in Figures 1a and 1b respectively.
There are three main parts to the proposed architecture.
The first is the audio and video encoders, where separate
pipelines handle audio and video features. We use 3 layers
of Mamba2[32] for each. Following this, a linear layer con-
verts features to a common size. Letx a ∈R B×Ta×Da and
xv ∈R B×Tv×Dv denote the paired audio and video features
extracted from EAT and Timesformer respectively whereBde-
notes batch size,T a,v denotes the number of tokens andD a,v
denotes the size of each token. Both features are normalized
using LayerNorm[33] before being passed to the respective en-
coder stack. Leth a =f a
encA(xa)andh v =f v
encV (xv)be the
output of the audio and video encoders.
Features from both modes are converted to a common di-
mension,D c. In this work, we setD c = 768and normalise
again using LayerNorm, before projecting into a shared lin-
ear layer, such that audio and video features have a shape of
¯za∈R B×Ta×Dc and¯zv∈R B×Tv×Dc.
We subsequently apply cross-attention fusion. There are
many fewer audio tokens compared to the video tokens (video
includes spatial information). As such, we use two uni-
directional cross-attention mechanisms; one updates audio to-
kens conditioned on attention-pooled video tokens, and the
other updates video tokens conditioned on audio tokens. The
outputs of this step areu a =XAttn a←v(¯za, pv)wherep v is
the pooled video tokens andu v =XAttn v←a(¯zv,¯za). As
1Pretrained models used are available at HuggingFace [31]
1823
(a)Proposed pretraining architecture
(b)Downstream classifier
architecture
Figure 1:The architecture used in this study. The proposed architecture for pretraining is illustrated in (a). The downstream classifica-
tion architecture is illustrated in (b).
cross-attention is order-agnostic, positional embeddingsP E a
andP E vfor audio and video inputs respectively are added
before the first cross-attention layer.
After two cross-attention layers, tokens are projected back
to their original shape,D a for audio andD v for video, by sepa-
rate linear layers(BackP roj a,v), and passed to individual de-
coders. Each decoder comprises three Mamba2 layers similar
to the encoder. The reconstructed features from the denoised
audio and video are given byˆx a =f a
decA(BackP roj a(ua))
andˆxv =f v
decV (BackP roj v(uv))respectively.
3.3.1. Pretraining Strategy
There are two pretraining stages. For both the input is noisy
audio and video features from the pretrained EAT and Times-
former. The first stage trains only the encoder pipelines for 80
epochs, allowing the encoders to learn to reconstruct clean fea-
tures from modality-specific corruption. The second stage lasts
200 epochs and freezes the encoders while training the cross-
attention and decoder to fuse information from both modes to
generate more robust features. For both steps we use Mean
Squared Error (MSE) loss. In the first step, the loss is calcu-
lated in a uni-modal fashion without weighting. Weighting is
included in the second stage the loss equation becomes:
L=w aLa(ˆxa, xa
clean) +w vLv(ˆxv, xv
clean)(1)
wherew a,v are the weights andL a,v are the MSE loss of each
mode. We initially setw a to 0.8 andw v to 1.2. We then ap-
ply GradNorm[34] to dynamically tunewa,v during pretraining.
Based on each modalities training rate, GradNorm will adjust
wa,v on the cross-attention and decoder parameters. Weights
are then renormalized to keep the total loss scale stable.
3.4. Downstream Evaluation
For downstream emotion recognition, a cosine classifier is used.
This takes audio or video tokens as input which are normalized
via LayerNorm. Normalized features are passed to an attention-
pooling layer, then a linear layer with a GeLU [35] activation
and dropout (probability of0.1). Finally, a cosine classifier[36]
is used to perform classification, as this helps reduce sensitivity
to feature norms and improves calibration.
We consider audio and video features separately for clas-
sification, and models for each mode use identical downstream
architectures. Note however that features for individual modes
have been enriched via the proposed cross-attention architec-
ture. We train the downstream model with clean data and
test with clean data and data at various noise levels (the noise
level used during pretraining, and at noise levels obtained by
varying the probability of each corruption types by±25%
and±50%). For the downstream task, 80% of RA VDESS
is used to train models, while the remaining 20% is used for
testing. Splitting is performed using the random split func-
tion in PyTorch with a seed to ensure reproducibility. Finally,
we performed McNemar’s significance test to compare non-
pretrained with encoder-only pretrained features, and encoder-
only pretrained features with multimodal-fusion pretrained fea-
tures, on both audio and video inputs under several noise levels.
Encoder-only and multimodal-fusion models share the same
frozen EAT/Timesformer features and the same Mamba2 en-
coders, and differ only in the cross-attention fusion and de-
coder stages. Excluding the frozen feature extractors, the shared
Mamba2 encoders account for 46.4 M trainable parameters in
the1 st phase of pretraining. The proposed model with cross-
attention and the Mamba2-based decoder has 76 M parameters
with 576 GFLOPs including the frozen encoder in the2nd phase
of pretraining. While a comparable2 nd phase Transformer-
based decoder has 73.4 M parameters with 591 GFLOPs.
4. Results and Discussion
We evaluate performance on RA VDESS using clean data and
different levels of noise. For non-pretrained and encoder-only
pretrained models, only clean and noisy accuracy per mode are
compared as there is no interaction between modes. For the
fused-pretrained models we consider four accuracies that result
from the combination of both modalities and the different noise
levels. In this work, modalities are evaluated separately.
4.1. Baseline without Pretraining
Figure 2a shows the downstream task when trained and tested
using EAT and Timesformer features without pretraining. With-
out pretraining, the clean audio input yields only77%accuracy,
lower than clean video at93%; indicating that audio features
from EAT are less discriminative than the Timesformer video
features on the RA VDESS dataset. We observe a large gap in
performance between clean and noisy inputs, especially with
the audio where noisy audio accuracy drops to between39%
and70%depending on the noise level. While both modalities
degrade when noise is added, video is more stable under noisy
conditions, where the accuracy remains between79%and89%.
4.2. Uni-modal Pretrained Features
Figure 2b shows downstream task performance when trained
and tested using denoised EAT and Timesformer features us-
ing the pretrained encoder. Here, features are not fused and
representations are unimodal. Result shows the same trend
as Section 4.1. Clean audio again performs worse than clean
video, but there are improvements in both modalities in the pres-
ence of noise. Noisy audio accuracy increases to between44%
1824
(a)Non-pretrained (EAT/Timesformer baseline)
 (b)Unimodal encoder-only pretrained
(c)Fused multimodal pretrained - Audio
 (d)Fused multimodal pretrained - Video
Figure 2:The results of the downstream emotion recognition task using (a) direct features from EAT and Timesformer, (b) features
refined via unimodal pretrained encoders, and (c) and (d) features refined via pretrained multimodal-fusion. Each subfigure shows the
accuracy of the downstream result under various noise-levels relative to that used in pretraining. In figure (c) and (d), as features are
passed through cross-attention fusion there are four possible feature combinations: NANV denotes noisy audio with noisy video, CANV
denotes clean audio with noisy video, NACV is noisy audio with clean video, and CACV is clean audio with clean video.
and76%, and noisy video increases to between84%to90%.
However, McNemar’s significance test shows that overall there
is no significant improvement when using encoder-only pre-
trained features over using non-pretrained features except for
with noisy audio when the noise level is 25% lower than the
level used in pretraining (p= 0.002, p <0.005).
4.3. Multi-modal Pretrained Features
Here, pretraining incorporates cross attention and there is an in-
teraction between modalities. As such, results include different
combinations of clean and noisy modes. Figure 2c shows emo-
tion recognition performance when using denoised audio fea-
tures. In this stage, a significant improvement in classification
accuracy can be observed. Overall, accuracy is higher than the
unimodal pretrained encoder and direct feature input without
pretraining, indicating that pretraining noisy audio features with
a more noise-tolerant modality such as video improves robust-
ness. Using McNemar’s significance test, we find that fusing
noisy audio features with clean video features (NACV) is sig-
nificantly better compared to using noisy audio features from
encoder-only pretraining(p= 0.045, p <0.05)at the same
noise level used during pretraining, and when the noise level is
increased by25% (p= 0.009, p <0.05). Using noisy audio
with noisy video (NANV) also yields a significant improvement
over using only noisy audio features from the encoder-only pre-
trained model at both25%noise level increase(p= 0, p <
0.05)and50%noise level increase(p= 0.048, p <0.05).
Figure 2d shows downstream performance when trained
and tested using denoised video features. For video, we see
a slight decrease in performance compared to the unimodal-
pretrained encoder, and we see fusing more robust features
(video) with the noise-sensitive audio features can decrease ac-
curacy. McNemar’s significance test shows that at the same
noise level as pretraining, the features of combined clean au-
dio with noisy video (CANV) using proposed pretrained model
is significantly better than only using noisy-video features from
unimodal encoder-only video features(p= 0.031, p <0.05).
5. Conclusion
In this study we proposed a Mamba2 state-space-model with
cross-attention based multimodal reconstruction pretraining.
Compared to using features from a unimodal encoder-only pre-
trained model, we see improvements on the downstream emo-
tion recognition task when using noisy audio (5.8% for NACV
and 4.6% for NANV), while video performance is largely main-
tained, showing only a slight decrease (2.1%-3.2% average drop
across CACV , NACV , CANV , and NANV). The slight drop in
video performance may be caused by baseline video perfor-
mance being saturated due to its less noise-sensitive nature, and
by inclusion of audio features which have lower accuracy even
when clean. Future research will consider adaptive fusion to
better identify when fusion is beneficial and avoid degradation.
1825
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used for language editing and pol-
ishing of the manuscript (e.g., grammar and wording) and for
assisting with auxiliary code such as plotting scripts. No part
of the scientific content, experimental design, results, or anal-
ysis was generated by AI. All AI-assisted output was reviewed
and validated by the authors, who take full responsibility and
accountability for the work.