Assessing the effect of volitional and synthetic pitch raising in female speakers 
on automatic speaker recognition  
Chloe Patman1, Linda Gerlach2, Anil Alexander2, Finnian Kelly2, Kirsty McDougall1 
1 University of Cambridge 
2 Oxford Wave Research 
Cep72|kem37@cam.ac.uk, linda|anil|finnian@oxfordwaveresearch.com 
 
Abstract 
Volitional pitch raising is a form of voice disguise in forensic 
casework, yet its impact on automatic speaker recognition 
(ASR) remains unclear. This study examines ASR performance 
with raised pitch speech, focusing on between-speaker 
variability among females. Initially, three speakers were 
analysed using a spectral x-vector system, comparing default 
and raised pitch samples. Pitch raising reduced recognition 
accuracy, but effects varied across speakers. The worst-
performing speaker had the highest median f0 in the raised pitch 
condition, the largest increase from default to raised pitch 
speech and limited f0 excursion. A pilot study using synthetic 
pitch manipulations with more speakers confirmed speaker-
specific effects, though synthetic f0 raises did not fully capture 
volitional f0 raising strategies. Future work should use larger 
multi-speaker datasets of volitional pitch raising to clarify 
individual versus group effects on ASR.  
 
Index Terms: between-speaker variability, automatic speaker 
recognition, volitional pitch raising, female speakers  
1. Introduction 
1.1. Pitch and human perception of voice distinctiveness  
Pitch, and its acoustic correlate fundamental frequency (f0), is 
one of several cues listeners use to differentiate voices. A more 
nuanced perspective comes from [1], who examined whether 
speakers at the extremes of an f0 distribution are perceived as 
more distinctive than those near the population mean. Their 
results demonstrated that when speakers were judged relative to 
others within the same original pitch group (i.e. speakers who 
initially occupied the low-, medium-, or high-pitch regions of 
the f0 distribution), synthetically shifting pitch did not alter 
perceived similarity within those groups. These findings 
suggest that, when judging speakers who have a similar pitch, 
additional phonetic properties unique to the individual speakers 
are likely to play an important role in perceived distinctiveness. 
However, they also found that when similarity judgements were 
considered across all speakers, listeners perceived greater 
differences between voices when they were resynthesized at a 
medium pitch than at low or high pitches [2].  
While compelling, this account would benefit from validation 
using more speakers, as well as an exploration of same-speaker 
comparisons and female speakers. This paper investigates 
female speakers who typically exhibit a higher average f0 (≈200 
Hz) than male speakers (≈120 Hz) [3]. Understanding how 
pitch contributes to perceived distinctiveness in humans 
provides context for investigating this with machines.  
1.2. Pitch and machine perception of voice distinctiveness  
The effect of volitionally raising pitch on automatic speaker 
recognition (ASR) has been examined for male speakers of 
standard Chinese [4]. Results show that male speakers who 
volitionally raised their pitch were correctly recognised in only 
10% of cases, compared to 90% recognition for their personal 
default voice (‘personal default voice’ hereafter ‘default voice’, 
refers to an individual speaker’s typical or habitual voice 
quality (VQ)). Raised pitch samples also exhibited greater 
between-speaker variability than default voice samples. 
Between-speaker variability could present a challenge for ASR 
systems with limited understanding of the linguistic and 
phonetic information captured in speaker embeddings [5]. 
Examining performance at the individual speaker level can 
reveal phonetic characteristics not adequately captured during 
model training and guide targeted improvements [5].  
An exploration of between -speaker variability in ASR 
performance is presented in [6] which compares volitionally 
raised pitch speech and default voice from six male speakers of 
English. Overall metrics indicated that comparisons between 
default and volitionally raised pitch speech produced high log-
likelihood ratio costs (C llrs), reflecting reduced system 
performance. However, analysis at the individual speaker level 
revealed substantial variability in how male speakers raised 
their pitch. For example, speaker P1 exhibited the highest Cllr, 
along with the highest median f0 and the largest dif ference 
between default and volitionally raised pitch speech. Auditory 
analysis confirmed that P1 raised pitch through increased vocal 
fold vibration as well as other strategies like larynx raising and 
vocal fold tension. By contrast, speakers P4 and P6 raised pitch 
primarily through vocal fold vibration alone, resulting in lower 
Cllr values. The authors conclude that volitional pitch raising 
achieved primarily through vocal fold vibration has a limited 
impact on ASR performance, whereas using other phonetic 
strategies alters the spectral characteristics of the voice and 
substantially reduces recognition accuracy.  
1.3. Volitional pitch raising in male and female speakers 
The relationship between pitch and perceived distinctiveness is 
particularly important in forensic casework as volitional pitch 
changes are a common form of voice disguise [7]. Pitch raising 
can also occur in casework due to emotion or stress, sometimes 
resulting in extreme changes (e.g. when screaming [8]). 
However, this paper focuses exclusively on volitional pitch 
raising as a form of voice disguise. Research has revealed sex-
specific differences in the way speakers implement volitional 
pitch raises to disguise their voice [9]. Male speakers typically 
exhibit larger pitch increases, ranging from approximately 4.5 
to 20.5 semitones (STs). They also make substantial use of 
3989
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-444
falsetto: of 30 male speakers studied in [9], 12 volitionally 
raised f0 within the modal register, 13 switched to falsetto, and 
5 used both strategies. By contrast, female speakers 
demonstrated smaller overall pitch shifts, ranging from 
approximately 2.1 to 13.5 STs, and relied far less on falsetto 
with only 2 of 34 speakers using it. Most female speakers 
remained entirely within the modal register. These sex-specific 
differences highlight the need to specifically examine female 
speakers because their strategies for volitional pitch raising may 
interact differently with ASR system performance.  
1.4. The present study   
Based on human speech perception studies of male speakers, 
volitional pitch raising is predicted to reduce a machine’s ability 
to distinguish between speakers [3, 4]. ASR studies of male 
speakers further show that, although overall system 
performance is degraded by volitional pitch raising, this effect 
is highly speaker dependent and based on the phonetic 
strategies used to raise pitch. The present study extends this 
investigation to female speakers, who were selected due to their 
higher baseline f0 [3], distinct strategies for volitional pitch 
raising [9], and their relative underrepresentation in the forensic 
phonetics literature [10, p. 283]. The research questions are as 
follows:  
1. How does volitional pitch raising affect an ASR 
system’s ability to distinguish among female 
speakers?  
2. Which phonetic factors may account for variation in 
system performance across speakers?  
3. To what extent can synthetic pitch manipulations 
replicate the effects of volitional pitch raising in the 
absence of large multi-speaker datasets?  
2. Methods 
2.1. Test data  
Speech samples were taken from the three female phoneticians 
in the Person-Specific Automatic Speaker Recognition (PASR) 
database [6]. Two of the speakers were native English speakers 
(P5 and P8), and one was a native Spanish and an L2 English 
speaker (P7). All recordings were studio-quality (48 kHz), 
single-channel samples of a reading passage in English, each 
lasting approximately 25-35 seconds. A subset of the female 
data was used. Specifically, in both sessions 1 and 2, three 
repetitions of each speaker’s default and volitionally raised 
pitch voice were used. This design yielded 27 same-speaker and 
54 different-speaker comparisons.  While the database has some 
limitations (e.g. one non-native English speaker, a small sample 
size and vocal manipulations produced by trained phoneticians 
whose laryngeal control may not reflect those of the general 
population), publicly available databases involving these vocal 
manipulations are rare. PASR therefore offers a valuable 
starting point for the examination of  between-speaker 
variability for female speakers in highly controlled conditions.  
2.2 Automatic speaker comparisons  
Same- and different-speaker comparisons were conducted 
using non-contemporaneous speech samples, including default-
default (D-D) and default-raised (D-R) comparisons. These 
analyses were performed using the spectral x-vector model in 
the VOCALISE 2021 v.3.0.0.1746 speaker recognition system 
[11]. The spectral model captures the overall spectral 
characteristics and shape of the speech signal using Mel -
Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs). MFCCs are  
extracted by dividing the signal into overlapping frames and 
applying a series of transformations to represent the short-term 
power spectrum. Twenty-two-dimensional MFCCs, including 
energy, were extracted using 25 ms Hamming windows with a 
10 ms frame shift. Several performance metrics are used to 
report the results of the comparisons based on Bio-Metrics 3.0 
[12]. First, the Equal Error Rate (EER), where false acceptances 
equal false rejections, was calculated. A lower EER indicates 
better system performance. Individual speaker performance 
was also assessed using x-vector scores and zooplots [13]. X-
vector scores assess sample similarity, with higher scores 
reflecting greater similarity. Zooplot analysis visualizes 
individual speaker performance, helping to identify both 
consistently well recognized speakers and those who are prone 
to confusion. Calibration was not applied as our analysis 
focused on metrics insensitive to calibration (e.g. EER).     
3. Volitional pitch raising results 
Table 1: EERs from PASR comparisons. D-D = 
default-default, D-R = default-raised; SS and DS = 
same- and different-speaker trials. 
Comparison SS DS EER% 
D-D 27 54 0.0 
D-R 27 54 14.4 
 
As seen in Table 1, in the D-D comparisons, the x-vector model 
achieved perfect performance (EER = 0.0%) for all three female 
speakers. As expected, D-R comparisons yielded a higher EER, 
showing that volitional pitch raising degrades system 
performance. However, this masks speaker -specific 
differences. Although no outliers were detected in the zooplot 
(likely due to small sample size), x-vector scores suggest that 
the elevated EER is driven by a particular speaker. Figure 1 
shows same- and different-speaker scores for the comparisons, 
illustrating that D-D scores are well separated, whereas D-R 
comparisons show varying degrees of overlap. Since higher x-
vector scores indicate greater similarity, Figure 1 illustrates that 
when P5 raises her pitch, the machine perceives her as less 
similar to herself and more similar to other speakers. Therefore, 
P5’s recognizability is most affected by pitch raising. 
Interestingly, she was one of the two native English speakers, 
indicating that language background does not explain her 
reduced recognizability, though it may partially account for 
P7’s maintained distinctiveness. 
 
Figure 1: X-vector similarity scores for same- (green) 
and different- (orange) speaker pairs in the D-D (top) 
and D-R (bottom) PASR comparisons.  
D−R
D−D
P5 P7 P8
−100
−50
0
50
−100
−50
0
50
Speaker
X−Vector Score
ComparisonDifferent SpeakerSame Speaker
3990
Building on [6], who reported that the worst-performing 
male speaker raised his pitch by increasing vocal fold 
vibration as well as raising his larynx and tensing his vocal 
folds, both acoustic and auditory analyses of the three 
female speakers were conducted. Acoustic analysis of f0 
was undertaken using a long-term pitch analysis script [14] 
in Praat [15] which provided mean, median, and standard 
deviation values. It generated results within a 100-600 Hz 
range to accommodate for volitional pitch raising. Figure 2 
illustrates the distribution of f0 for each speaker in the 
default and raised condition. As seen in the Figure, the 
median default f0 values of the three speakers were similar, 
falling near the middle of the expected f0 distribution for 
females [16]. In the raised pitch condition, P5 exhibited the 
highest median f0 (342 Hz) and the largest median f0 
difference between default and raised speech. In STs, f0 
increases averaged 9.8 ST for P5, 7.6 ST for P7, and 5.1 ST 
for P8. Auditory assessment conducted by the first author 
and another phonetician found no strong evidence of larynx 
raising in any of the speakers. However, P5 appeared to 
exhibit limited pitch excursion in the raised pitch samples. 
This was confirmed by the acoustic analysis in Figure 3, 
which shows the mean difference between maximum and 
minimum f0 for each speaker across recordings.   
 
Figure 2: Boxplot of default (green) versus raised 
(orange) f0 distribution for each PASR speaker.  
 
Figure 3: Barchart of pitch excursion in STs for default 
(green) and raised (orange) f0 for each PASR speaker.   
 
Overall, volitional pitch raising reduces the system’s ability to 
distinguish some female speakers, as seen in P5’s overlapping 
D-R x-vector scores versus P8’s maintained separation (Figure 
1). This likely reflects differences in phonetic strategies (e.g. 
P5’s extreme pitch raising and limited pitch excursion). 
However, this interpretation requires validation with more 
speakers (see section 4). 
4. Can synthetic pitch manipulations 
replicate the effects of volitional pitch 
raising on ASR?  
Motivated by the human perception experiment [1] that used 
synthetic pitch manipulations to examine the relationship 
between pitch and perceived voice distinctiveness in male 
speakers, the present researchers conducted a pilot study to test 
how synthetic pitch manipulations of female speech affect ASR 
performance. This approach isolates the impact of pitch raising 
and addresses the small sample size limitation discussed in 
section 2.1. It also allows for an understanding of the extent to 
which synthetic pitch manipulations can replicate volitional 
pitch raising in the absence of large, multi-speaker datasets.   
4.1. Speech materials  
Default voice samples were taken from 16 Southern Standard 
British English female speakers, aged 18-35 years, in the Leeds 
Multi-Session (LMS) database [17]. Two non -
contemporaneous recordings (44.1 kHz) of a read-speech 
passage, lasting between 25-35 seconds, were selected for every 
speaker. Each speaker’s average pitch was then synthetically 
manipulated based on patterns of human pitch variability 
reported in both [9] and Section 3. For instance, the largest 
average pitch increase observed in Section 3 was 9.8 STs and 
therefore our most extreme synthetic raising was comparable at 
10.5 STs. Synthetic pitch manipulations were generated in 
Praat using a custom script [15], which adjusted each speaker’s 
long-term f0 from sample 2 according to the settings listed in 
the left column of Table 2. Same- and different-speaker 
comparisons were conducted using the same VOCALISE 
model described in section 2.2. This included using the non-
contemporaneous samples to compare default-default (D-D), 
and default-synthetic f0 manipulations across conditions A-E 
(see Table 2). Note that VOCALISE is not trained to detect 
synthetic speech. 
4.2. Results  
Table 2 shows EERs for the different levels of synthetic pitch 
manipulation. Interestingly, baseline D-D performance was 
worse for the LMS data (EER = 3.9%) than the PASR data 
(EER = 0.0%) suggesting that the system less reliably 
distinguishes default voices for the LMS speakers. While EERs 
generally increased with more extreme pitch raising, individual 
speaker analysis implies no consistent effect of synthetic f0 
raising on ASR performance. To explore individual speaker 
differences, “doves” and “chameleon” outliers identified in the 
zooplots are examined (Figure 4).  
Table 2: EER for the D-D and D-R(A-E) synthetic pitch 
manipulations applied to the LMS speakers. Each row 
includes 16 SS and 240 DS comparisons. 
Comparison  
(increase in f0 in semitones) 
EER% 
D-D 3.9 
D-RA: Low (+1.5ST) 5.2 
D-RB: Mild (+2.5 ST) 8.7 
D-RC:  Medium (+3.5 ST) 12 
D-RD: High (+7 ST) 13.1 
D-RE: Extreme (+ 10.5 ST) 15.2 
 
P5 P7 P8
Default Raised Default Raised Default Raised
200
250
300
350
Vocal Condition
F0 (Hz)
Speaker
0
1
2
3
4
P5 P7 P8
Speaker
Mean Pitch Excursion (ST)
Condition
Default
Raised
3991
Doves are speakers who remain similar to themselves while 
being well separated from others. As seen in the top of Figure 
4, in the baseline D-D comparisons, speakers S01 and S15 are 
doves. Speaker S15 maintained this status for smaller pitch 
increases (low and mild), but no doves are observed from the 
medium synthetic shifts (+3.5 ST) onwards (see the bottom of 
Figure 4). Therefore, once pitch is raised beyond this point, 
previously distinctive speakers lose their distinctiveness. 
Interestingly, speaker S01’s default voice lies at the lower end 
of the expected female f0 distribution, whereas speaker S15 is 
at the upper end. This is illustrated in Figure 5, which shows the 
mean f0 for each LMS speaker in their default voice and in the 
low, medium, and extreme synthetic f0 raises. These results 
suggest that the system finds some speakers at the extremes of 
the f0 distribution distinctive, but as pitch is artificially raised, 
this distinctiveness is reduced. Further evidence of reduced 
distinctiveness with synthetically raised pitch is observed in the 
emergence of chameleons. Chameleon speakers are similar to 
both themselves and to other speakers. Speakers S12 and S16, 
whose default f0 are both in the low-to-mid range of the 
expected f0 distribution for this population , become more 
similar to other speakers. For S16 this occurs at 7 ST and for 
S12 at 3.5ST (see bottom of Figure 4). However, it is worth 
nothing that S12’s different-speaker scores remain similar 
across zooplots.  
 
 
 
Figure 4: Zooplot analysis highlighting outlier speakers based 
on same- and different-speaker scores. Top: D-D 
comparisons; Bottom: D-RC: Medium comparisons. 
 
Figure 5: Mean f0 of the LMS speakers in default voice, low, 
medium and extreme synthetic raises. Error bars = +/- 1SD.  
Additional outlier types were also observed in the zooplot 
analysis. These speakers showed low match scores against their 
own models and either high (worms) or low (phantoms) match 
scores against imposters, such as Speaker S06 who was a 
phantom. As shown in Figure 5, this is likely due to her within-
speaker variability in f0 across the two unmanipulated samples. 
Her higher average f0 in the sample which was synthetically 
raised meant the synthetic raises were more extreme when 
compared to her default sample. These outliers likely increase 
EERs, though they fall outside the scope of this paper.  
5. Discussion 
Results from the volitional pitch raising PASR data show that, 
while volitionally raising f0 substantially degrades overall ASR 
performance, this effect is not uniform across individuals. Both 
the worst-performing male speaker in [6] and the female 
speaker in the present study produced the highest median f0 in 
the raised pitch condition and the largest increase in f0 from 
default to volitionally raised pitch within their respective 
studies. They differed, however, in that the male speaker also 
employed larynx raising and vocal fold tension, whereas the 
female speaker exhibited limited pitch excursion. Larger 
samples incorporating lay speakers are required to determine 
whether these effects arise from group- or individual-level 
variation and to generalize the findings to real-world scenarios 
where lay speakers typically have less articulatory awareness 
and laryngeal control.   
Results from the synthetic pitch manipulations find that isolated 
pitch raising increases EERs, although outlier analysis shows 
no consistent effect on ASR performance across speakers . 
Importantly, synthetic manipulations cannot predict the other 
strategies an individual speaker may use when volitionally 
raising pitch. Therefore, synthetic pitch raising should not be 
treated as a proxy for volitional pitch raising.  
Finally, given that the worst-performing speaker in the PASR 
data exhibits the most extreme pitch raising (see Figure 2) and 
that higher EERs are observed in the extreme synthetic raises 
(see Table 2), future research should look to explore extreme 
pitch raising relevant to forensic casework. For instance, pitch 
raising as a disguise may involve an effort to sound natural, 
resulting in more subtle changes. In contrast, pitch raising 
driven by emotion can produce extreme variability [8].  
6. Conclusion 
Based on the data used in this study (real but acted, and 
synthetic), ASR performance varied between female speakers 
when f0 was raised: some remained distinctive, whereas others 
became harder to identify. For volitional pitch raising, between-
speaker variability likely reflects differences in the range of 
phonetic strategies used by each speaker . In synthetic 
manipulations it may be driven by where a speaker’s default f0 
falls within the expected population distribution  or other 
phonetic features. However, synthetic approaches cannot fully 
replicate the range of phonetic strategies used in volitional pitch 
raising. The results highlight the importance of investigating 
between-speaker variability when exploring how pitch-raising 
strategies interact with ASR performance. Addressing this will 
require larger multi-speaker datasets of volitional pitch raising. 
This will clarify whether the observed effects stem from group-
level or individual-level differences, enabling more definitive 
recommendations for the use of ASR in forensic casework.  
200
300
400
S01S02S03S04S05S06S07S08S09S10S11S12S13S14S15S16
Speaker
F0 (Hz)
ConditionF0 (Default F0)D−RA (Low)D−RC (Medium)D−RE (Extreme)
3992
7. Acknowledgements  
The first author is supported by a Harding Distinguished 
Postgraduate Scholarship at the University of Cambridge. We 
thank the PASR and LMS teams for access to their databases 
and the University of York and Oxford Wave Research for 
hosting an ASR workshop that provided valuable training.  
8. Generative AI disclosure  
When revising this manuscript, the first author used ChatGPT 
to improve grammar and readability. After using this tool, the 
author carefully reviewed and edited the content as needed. 
9. References 
[1] K. McDougall, A. Paver, and F. Nolan, ‘Voice distinctiveness: 
An investigation of the role of speakers’ position in a 
population with respect to f0’, in Proceedings of the 
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences 2023, Prague, 
Czech Republic, Aug. 07, 2023, pp. 3795 –3799. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.internationalphoneticassociation.org/icphs-
proceedings/ICPhS2023/full_papers/349.pdf 
[2] A. Paver, K. McDougall, and F. Nolan, ‘Voice memory and 
voice distinctiveness: The role of pitch distribution in a 
population.’, in prep. 
[3] A. Simpson, ‘Phonetic differences between male and female 
speech’, Language and Linguistics Compass, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 
621–640, 2009, doi: 10.1111/j.1749-818X.2009.00125.x. 
[4] C. Zhang and T. Tan, ‘Voice disguise and automatic speaker 
recognition’, Forensic Science International, vol. 