PROGRESS: Coverage-guided RL to Train Search-augmented LLM Agent
Sudipta Paul1,∗∗, Vijay Srinivasan1, Vivek Kulkarni1, Aounon Kumar1, Yashas Malur Saidutta1,
Wenbo Li1, Srinivas Chappidi1
1 AI Center-Mountain View, Samsung Electronics
{sudipta.paul, v.srinivasan, v.kulkarni1, aounon.kumar, ym.saidutta, wenbo.li1,
vasu.c}@samsung.com
Abstract
Existing search-augmented LLM agents are trained us-
ing Reinforcement Learning to boost its reasoning capabilities.
However, these approaches primarily rely on outcome-level re-
wards which provide little supervision over search behavior and
overlook agent’s ability to decompose complex queries prop-
erly. To mitigate this issue, we propose PROGRESSwhich uti-
lizes teacher-guided coverage reward to explicitly shape decom-
posed query generation of the policy model. During training,
frozen teacher models are used to decompose complex queries
into essential search queries. These essential search queries
are utilized to guide the search behavior of the policy model.
Integrated into an R1-style training framework, our approach
provides lightweight guidance over query decomposition de-
cisions without dense process-level supervision. Experiments
show that coverage-guided RL improves overall task perfor-
mance, highlighting the importance of explicitly supervising
search strategies in agentic LLMs.
Index Terms: Search-augmented Agent, Multi-hop QA, Rein-
forcement Learning, Coverage Reward, Query Decomposition
1. Introduction
Large language models augmented with external search tools
can execute complex and multi-turn reasoning tasks based on a
user query by retrieving real-time, external information [1, 2].
In such agentic setting, the model must learn not only how
to reason over retrieved evidence, but also what to search and
when to search. Recent works [1] show that training small
LLMs with reinforcement learning (RL) to interleave reasoning
and search actions can significantly improve performance on
multi-hop question answering and knowledge-intensive tasks .
However, despite encouraging empirical progress, current RL-
based search agents largely rely on outcome-level rewards (e.g.,
exact match accuracy), providing little direct supervision over
the quality of decomposed search queries. This limitation leads
to inefficient search behavior, generation of composite search
queries, and memorization of reasoning patterns, especially in
agents with small language models.
To enable small language models with granular query de-
composition with sufficient coverage over required reasoning
hops, we propose PROGRESS. It is a lightweight yet effec-
tive framework that utilizes teacher-generated essential search
queries to guide the policy model. Our key insight is that suc-
cessful multi-hop reasoning depends on successful decomposi-
tion of complex queries and comprehensive coverage over es-
sential set of latent information needs. We also observe that
strong LLM can approximate such search behavior significantly
**indicates the corresponding author.
Figure 1:This figure illustrates the computation of coverage re-
ward based on query matching information. The Policy Query 1
does not match with any Teacher Query due to granularity mis-
match. However, both Policy Query 2 and 3 match with Teacher
Queries in terms of semantics and granularity.
better than small language models. This observation motivates
us to utilize a strong LLM as a guide for the policy model train-
ing.
Instead of supervising each reasoning step, we first generate
a set of essential search queries using a frozen teacher model.
Then we identify the matches between generated search queries
of policy model and pre-generated essential search queries of
the teacher model based on both semantics and granularity. To
encourage the policy model to generate search queries that are
both comprehensive and focused, we introduce a trajectory-
levelcoverage rewardbased on the harmonic mean of preci-
sion and recall (F1-score) computed on matched queries as il-
lustrated in Fig. 1. PROGRESSbuilds upon the Search-R1 train-
ing paradigm [1], which treats the search engine as part of the
environment and stabilizes RL training through retrieved-token
masking and KL-regularized policy optimization. Compared
to outcome-only training, coverage reward in PROGRESSintro-
duces an explicit inductive bias toward effective retrieval strate-
gies without requiring dense step-level manual annotation. Em-
pirical results suggest that explicitly shaping search behavior is
a critical ingredient in training robust search-augmented LLM
agents. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We introduce PROGRESS, a teacher-guided training frame-
work that provides structured supervision of the search be-
havior for a RL-trained search-augmented LLM agent.
• We propose coverage reward which is formulated based on
the overlap between policy-generated search queries and
teacher generated essential queries. We integrate it into the
RL training framework, preserving stability while improving
search quality without step-level manual supervision.
• We empirically show that PROGRESSleads to 2-5%absolute
5819
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2760
improvement across different multi-hop QA datasets com-
pared to baseline while preserving/improving accuracy for
general QA datasets.
2. Related Works
Recent works [1, 2] have explored using large language mod-
els (LLMs) as search-augmented agents. It has enabled open-
domain question answering [3] by LLMs through the retrieval
of evidence from large corpora and the generation of answers
based on the retrieved context. Based on the complexity of the
user query, open-domain question answering can be categorized
into two sub-classes: general question answering [4] (focuses
on answering from a single source of information) and multi-
hop question answering [5] (requires linking multiple, distinct
pieces of information—often across different sources). To ad-
dress open-domain question answering, several approaches in-
terleave reasoning steps with tool calls at inference time. IR-
CoT [6] explicitly interleaves retrieval with chain-of-thought.
ReAct [7] prompts LLMs to alternate between reasoning traces
and actions (e.g., Wikipedia search). Few works [8, 9, 10]
train agentic RAG models using supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
on multi-step retrieval trajectories synthesized by stronger mod-
els or search procedures. Chain-of-Retrieval Augmented Gen-
eration (CoRAG) [8] constructs intermediate retrieval chains via
rejection sampling. DeepRAG [9] models retrieval-augmented
reasoning as an MDP and uses search-based data generation
(including tree search) to produce training trajectories. Re-
cently, Reinforcement Learning has been used to optimize end-
to-end agent trajectories directly [1, 11, 12, 13]. Search-R1 [1]
shows that purely outcome-based RL can train LLMs to inter-
leave reasoning with multiple search queries. HiPRAG [11]
extends this line with hierarchical process rewards that pro-
vide finer-grained credit assignment over search/non-search de-
cisions to reduce over-search and under-search. R1-Searcher
[14] also incentivizes search usage via outcome-based RL in a
two-stage framework, focusing on improving the model’s abil-
ity to invoke external search when needed.β-GRPO [15] intro-
duces a confidence-thresholded RL objective to mitigate sub-
optimal search and improve decision quality. In parallel, Ze-
roSearch [16] addresses the high cost and instability of RL by
training with simulated retrieval during RL. Our proposed ap-
proach PROGRESSbelongs to this RL-for-search family but tar-
gets a complementary bottleneck: supervision over thecover-
ageof the decomposed queries. We explicitly focus on shap-
ing the quality of multi-hop query decomposition during RL via
coverage-based supervision.
3. PROGRESS- Our Method
In this section, we first discuss the RL training framework of the
LLM agent. Then we provide details on our proposed coverage
reward with teacher-guided training framework.
3.1. Preliminaries: Search-augmented LLM Agent
Search-augmented LLM agent produces trajectories with multi-
turn retrieval and reasoning for a user query. It in-
vokes search calls when explicitly triggered by<search>and
</search>. Retrieved content is enclosed within<information>
and</information>tokens, while LLM reasoning steps are
wrapped within<think>and</think>tokens [1]. The gen-
eration process continues until the generation of a final answer
within<answer>and</answer>token or reaching a prede-
fined action budget. Training this search-augmented LLM agent
is formulated as a reinforcement learning problem, where the
language model serves as a policy model that interacts with the
environment. Given input questionx, policy modelπ θ, and
generated trajectoryy, the objective is to maximize the expected
reward over generated trajectories while constraining deviations
from a reference policy:
max
θ
Ex∼D,y∼πθ (·|x;R) [r(x,y)]−βD KL (πθ∥π ref ).(1)
Here,r(x,y)denotes a trajectory-level reward andπ ref is a
frozen reference model used for regularization. Optimization is
applied only to the tokens generated by the policy. We optimize
the policy using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [17]. Let
πθ denote the current policy andπ θold the behavior policy used
to collect the trajectories. PPO maximizes a clipped surrogate
objective:
L(θ) =E t
h
min

ρt(θ)At,clip
 
ρt(θ),1−ϵ,1 +ϵ

At
i
,
(2)
whereρt(θ) = πθ (yt|st)
πθold (yt|st) is the probability ratio between new
and old policies,s t is the state,ϵis a clipping hyperparameter,
andA t denotes the advantage estimate. This objective limits
excessively large policy updates while enabling efficient opti-
mization of trajectory-level rewards.
3.2. Coverage Reward
Outcome-based rewards, such as exact-match and format re-
wards, primarily evaluate the correctness of the final answer but
do not explicitly supervise the quality of intermediate search
behavior. To provide structured yet lightweight guidance, we
introduce teacher generated essential search queries that serve
as weak supervision signals over retrieval strategies. For each
input questionx, a frozen teacher modelπ T generates a set of
essential search queries,Q T (x) ={q T
1,qT
2,...,q T
K}. These
teacher generated search queries are intended to approximate
the latent information requirements necessary to solve the task.
Rather than prescribing a fixed reasoning trajectory, they pro-
vide a high-level representation of the key sub-questions that
a successful search policy should cover. During rollout, the
policy model generates its own search trajectoryywith se-
quence of search queries to interact with the environment. The
corresponding set of extracted search queries from the policy-
generated trajectory isQP (x,y) ={q P
1,qP
2,...,q P
M}.
To measure how effectively the policy captures the intended
retrieval intents, we compute a coverage signal based on the
overlap between policy-generated queries and teacher anchors.
LetI(x,y) =Q P (x,y)∩Q T (x)denote the set of matched
queries. This set is identified utilizing LLM judge which con-
siders semantics and granularity as the matching criteria. Intu-
itively, this set represents the portion of teacher-identified infor-
mation needs that the policy addresses during a rollout. We can
quantify the coverage of the policy trajectory using precision
and recall:
Precision= |I|
|QP|, Recall= |I|
|QT|.(3)
Precision reflects how closely the policy queries align with
relevant retrieval intents, penalizing redundant or irrelevant
searches, while recall measures whether the policy sufficiently
covers the teacher-identified sub-questions. By considering
both metrics jointly, we avoid encouraging trivial strategies
such as issuing many loosely related queries or producing only
5820
Table 1:Performance on question answering on various datasets.PROGRESSoutperforms strong baselines like Zero-Search and
Search-R1 on all multi-hop QA datasets (HotpotQA, 2wiki, MuSiQue). All training approaches reported here use Qwen2.5-3B Base
model. Best and second-best results are marked in bold and underline respectively.†/⋆ represents in-domain/out-domain datasets. EM
and FR refer to exact match and format reward respectively
Method Trainset General QA Multi-hop QA Multi-hop QA Combined QA
NQ† TriviaQA⋆ PopQA⋆ HotpotQA† 2Wiki⋆ MuSiQue⋆ A verage A verage
Direct Inference - 10.60 28.80 10.80 14.90 24.40 2.00 13.77 15.25
RAG - 34.80 54.40 38.70 25.50 22.60 4.70 17.60 30.12
IRCoT - 11.10 31.20 20.00 16.40 17.10 6.70 13.40 17.08
Search-o1 - 16.60 31.00 8.20 14.80 22.40 5.20 14.13 16.37
R1 NQ, HotpotQA 14.20 34.80 20.80 19.60 28.40 6.40 18.13 20.70
Zero-search NQ, HotpotQA 43.00 61.60 44.80 33.80 34.60 13.00 27.13 38.47
Search-R1 (EM) NQ, HotpotQA 40.60 58.70 43.50 28.40 27.30 4.90 20.20 33.90
Search-R1 (EM, FR) NQ, HotpotQA 42.90 58.48 44.09 36.04 36.23 13.65 28.64 38.94
PROGRESS NQ, HotpotQA 43.8259.52 44.39 36.45 38.12 16.01 30.19 39.72
Table 2:Performance comparison on QA tasks when model is
trained with only multi-hop QA dataset (HotpotQA)
Method Trainset HotpotQA 2wiki MuSiQue A verage
Search-R1 NQ, HotpotQA 36.04 36.23 13.65 28.64
Search-R1 HotpotQA 33.14 34.72 13.02 26.96
PROGRESS HotpotQA 36.33 38.95 18.57 31.28
a small subset of essential searches. The coverage reward is
computed as the harmonic mean:
rcov(x,y) = 2∗Precision∗Recall
Precision+Recall ,(4)
The use of the F1 formulation balances completeness and
specificity, providing a smooth trajectory-level signal that en-
courages the model to generate concise yet comprehensive
query decompositions. Unlike dense process rewards that as-
sign credit at every reasoning step, this reward operates at the
trajectory level, preserving the flexibility of autoregressive gen-
eration while still guiding retrieval behavior. The set of matched
queriesI(x,y)is inferred by an LLM judge. The final reward
combines task performance and format reward with coverage
guidance:
r(x,y) =r ans(x,y) +r format(y) +λ covrcov(x,y),(5)
wherer ans andr format denote the exact match reward and the
format reward, respectively. The outcome-based reward encour-
ages the policy to produce correct answers following a proper
format, while the coverage reward introduces an inductive bias
toward generating structured and informative search queries.
We optimize Eqn. 1 using the PPO method to train the search-
augmented agent.
4. Experiments
We evaluate PROGRESSon multi-hop and open-domain ques-
tion answering benchmarks. Our goal is to assess whether
explicitly supervising search query coverage improves down-
stream answer accuracy, search behavior, and retrieval quality
in multi-hop question-answering tasks.
Datasets.We conduct experiments on widely used knowledge-
intensive Question Answering (QA) datasets. Natural Ques-
tions (NQ) [4], TriviaQA [18], and PopQA [19] evaluate open-
domain factual reasoning. HotpotQA [5], 2WikiMultiHopQA
(2wiki) [20], and MuSiQue [21] evaluate multi-hop reasoning
requiring sequential retrieval and compositional search strate-
gies. Following prior work, models are trained on NQ and
Table 3:Search query quality analysis
Dataset Method Completeness Granularity
2wiki Search-R1 29.77 60.51
PROGRESS 40.63 62.04
MuSiQue Search-R1 18.09 62.06
PROGRESS 24.88 64.38
HotpotQA datasets unless otherwise mentioned, and evaluated
across all datasets to measure generalization.
Implementation Details.Following prior works, we use
Qwen2.5-3B (Base) as the policy model across all experiments.
The search environment retrieves the top-3passages for each
generated query and appends them to the context using special
delimiters. Teacher essential search queries are generated of-
fline using Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct model. We use 8 A100 GPUs
during training and train the policy model for 600 steps. We also
use Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct model as an LLM judge to identify
matched queries and compute coverage reward using Eqn. 4.
We empirically setλ cov to 0.2. For retrieval, we use the 2018
Wikipedia dump [22] as the knowledge source and E5 [23] as
the retriever.
Main Results.Table 1 reports QA performance of different
approaches in six datasets. Exact Match (EM) is used as the
evaluation metric. We compare PROGRESSagainst strong base-
lines that includes: i) Direct Inference: LLM answers directly
without any retrieval mechanism, ii) RAG: Conventional RAG
setup where retrieval is performed once based on the query, iii)
Prompt-based Agentic RAG: LLM agent is prompted to achieve
multi-step reasoning and search (IRCoT, Search-o1), iv) RL
trained models: LLM is trained with Reinforcement Learn-
ing to enable search augmented behavior (R1, Zero-search,
Search-R1). PROGRESSconsistently outperforms both train-
ing based (R1, Zero-search, Search-R1) and non-training based
(RAG, IRCoT, Direct Inference) approaches for multi-hop QA
datasets while retaining competitive performance for general
QA datasets. The overall improvement is also evident from the
averaged score from all the datasets. It has been observed that
in many cases General QA dataset questions can be answered
by utilizing internal knowledge. Since Zero-search approach re-
lies on utilizing LLM internal knowledge, it has performed well
on General QA datasets. To further test the significance of the
coverage reward, we have trained the policy model with only
multi-hop QA samples (HotpotQA) instead of commonly used
combination of general QA and multi-hop QA samples. As ob-
served in Table 2, training with only multi-hop QA dataset fur-
ther boost the agent’s performance on multi-hop QA tasks. We
5821
(a)Two example cases wherePROGRESSsuccessfully generates granular
search query for a given complex user query compared to Search-R1.
Search-R1 tends to use the complex query directly for search.
(b)Two example cases wherePROGRESSsuccessfully generates search
queries that comprehensively covers all information needs of a given
complex user query compared to Search-R1.
Figure 2:Qualitative Examples wherePROGRESSgenerates search query with better granularity and completeness.
Table 4:Performance comparison for retrieval accuracy.
Method Trainset HotpotQA 2wiki MuSiQue A verage
Search-R1 NQ + HotpotQA 49.37 37.66 28.94 38.66
PROGRESS NQ + HotpotQA 55.54 43.96 35.38 44.96
Search-R1 HotpotQA 46.33 37.17 25.45 36.31
PROGRESS HotpotQA 55.73 44.31 37.40 45.81
gain5%EM accuracy improvement on MuSiQue dataset com-
pared to second best performance of Search-R1. This implies
that PROGRESShelps learn better decomposition and search
strategy to boost multi-hop QA performance.
Search Query Quality Analysis.The motivation behind utiliz-
ing coverage reward is to boost the comprehensiveness and the
granularity of the policy generated search queries. To under-
stand the impact of coverage reward on the policy model, we
systematically analyze the quality of the search queries. We uti-
lize 2wiki and MuSiQue dataset for this analysis. We have ran-
domly sampled 1000 examples from each dataset, inferred the
reasoning trajectories for each sample using the policy model,
and extracted the search queries generated in those trajecto-
ries. To evaluate the quality of these extracted search queries,
we consider the following two dimensions: i) Completeness:
The decomposed search queries together should cover every
key piece of information involved in the complex query. ii)
Granularity: Each decomposed search query should reflect one
atomic information. It should not bundle multiple atomic search
queries or operations in a decomposed search query. We uti-
lize a set of LLM judges together (GPT-4.1, GPT-5.1, and GPT-
5.2) to evaluate the search query quality. Completeness is com-
puted for each complex query; each LLM judge takes all the
extracted search queries and the complex query to generate a
boolean score. Then we use the mean of boolean score for each
sample. For Granularity, each LLM judge generates a boolean
score for each extracted search query. Then we take micro av-
erage across all search queries for the 1000 examples of the
dataset. Table 3 shows the comparison between Search-R1 and
PROGRESSfor search query quality analysis. For both 2wiki
and MuSiQue dataset, we observe significant improvement in
Completeness and Granularity dimension. This indicates that
the model trained with coverage reward results in search query
with better granularity and comprehensive coverage of the com-
plex query information need.
Retrieval Accuracy.Success of the search-augmented agent
largely depends on the retrieval performance. Correct retrieval
during the reasoning process increases the chance of correct
completion of the query. So beyond exact match evaluation
of the answer, we also want to evaluate if coverage reward is
helping to boost the retrieval performance. To evaluate retrieval
performance, we extract all the retrieved passages from the tra-
Table 5:Performance comparison for QA task on multi-hop QA
datasets using Qwen2.5-1.5B base model.
Method Trainset HotpotQA 2wiki MuSiQue A verage
Search-R1 NQ, HotpotQA 26.09 24.48 5.67 18.75
PROGRESS NQ, HotpotQA 27.37 25.51 5.87 19.58
jectory and check if the golden answer string is present in any
one of those retrieved passages. Table 4 shows the percentage of
queries where we have correct retrieval according to the above
approach. We observe that PROGRESSsignificantly improves
the accuracy of retrieval in all three multi-hop QA datasets. It
also shows significant improvement for training scenario where
we utilize only multi-hop QA dataset to train the policy model.
It suggests that guiding query decomposition using coverage re-
ward helps improve the models’ ability to craft effective and
useful search queries for the downstream search mechanism.
Qualitative results.Fig. 2a shows two example cases where
PROGRESSgenerates more granular search queries compared
to Search-R1. Search-R1 tends to utilize the complex query
directly for initial search, which can impact the retrieval per-
formance negatively. Fig. 2b shows two example cases where
PROGRESSsuccessfully generates search queries that compre-
hensively covers all information needs of a given complex user
query compared to Search-R1. As shown in Fig. 2b, there are
failure cases for PROGRESSwhere it uses the complex query
directly to search too.
Model Generalizability.To validate the generalizability of
PROGRESS, we also train a different base model (Qwen2.5-
1.5B) using our framework. Table 5 shows that Qwen2.5-1.5B
model trained with our framework can result in better perfor-
mance on multi-hop QA task across all three datasets.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we introduce a coverage-guided reinforcement
learning framework for training search-augmented language
models. While prior approaches primarily rely on outcome-
level rewards, we show that explicitly supervising the quality
of the search query can provide a simple yet effective signal for
improving search behavior. By leveraging teacher-generated es-
sential search queries and measuring their overlap with policy-
generated search queries, PROGRESSencourages more com-
prehensive and focused retrieval strategies without requiring
dense process-level supervision. Empirical results demonstrate
consistent improvements in question-answering performance,
query quality, and retrieval effectiveness across multiple multi-
hop benchmarks. These findings highlight the importance of
shaping intermediate search behavior when optimizing agentic
language models.
5822
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools like large language models have been used
to assist in the editing and polishing of the text. These tools have
been employed to enhance the readability, clarity, and language
quality of the manuscript, without altering the core research
findings, methodologies, or conclusions. All content presented
in this paper has been reviewed and revised by the authors to
ensure accuracy and alignment with research o