Broad Focus Rise(-fall) Declaratives in Venetan:  
Investigating Typological Outliers in Italo-Romance Intonation 
Elinor Payne, Angelo Dian 
University of Oxford 
elinor.payne@phon.ox.ac.uk, angelo.dian@ling-phil.ox.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
Intonational rises in unmarked declaratives are cross -
linguistically rare. While reported for Venetan (an Italo -
Romance variety spoken in north-eastern Italy), little is known 
about their properties, or indeed Venetan intonation in general. 
To address this, we investigate the prevalence, distribution and 
properties of intonational rise(-falls) in broad focus declaratives 
in gambellarese, a central-western Venetan dialect, for semi-
spontaneous speech. We find rise(-falls) to be roughly as 
common as falls, and to occur regardless of position of lexical 
stress, strongly indicating the existence of an alternative 
unmarked rising nuclear tune for declaratives, distinct from the 
H+L* L% tune reported for Italian and other Italo-Romance 
varieties. We also examine the phonetic effects of word-final 
stress (common in Venetan) on tonal alignment with regard to 
these rise(-falls). 
Index Terms: intonation, Venetan, Italo-Romance, broad focus 
declarative rises, typology 
1. Introduction 
1.1. Declarative rises 
The unmarked use of intonational rises for declarative 
statements is said to be typologically rare, going against an 
association, attested for most languages, between low pitch and 
declarative mode, and between high pitch and interrogative 
mode [1], [2]. The claim that declarative rises are ‘unnatural’ 
[3] has been attributed to e.g. aerodynamic constraints making 
rises more effortful [4], and contravention of the ‘frequency 
code’ [5], [6], which posits an iconic association between 
biological size (and thus vocal fold size) and aspects of meaning 
conveyed through speakers’ pitch. According to this code, high 
pitch is said to be associated with uncertainty and non-finality 
(hence its prevalence in questions), and low pitch with certainty 
and finality (hence its prevalence in declaratives).  
As [7] points out, languages may more commonly use rises 
for pragmatically marked declaratives (e.g. to cue non-finality), 
e.g. the rising contours of Pacific Rim varieties of English [9] 
and now more widespread (‘High Rising Terminals’, or HRT), 
which [8] argues signals a conceptual-stylistic choice. This is to 
be distinguished from rises in other varieties of English, 
referred to as the ‘Urban Northern British’ (UNB) group [8], 
[10] for which final rising pitch is the default statement contour, 
with no association of non-finality. These include: Glaswegian 
[11]; Liverpudlian [12], [13], [14], Birmingham [15], and 
Belfast [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]. Such rises are typically a low 
rise on the nuclear syllable followed by a high plateau, or 
‘plateau-slump’, and is thus also markedly different from that 
of HRT [8].  
While research in this area has largely focused on English, 
the phenomenon is found in other languages, e.g. the 
Extremadura dialect of Spanish [21] and Corfu Greek [22]. 
There is possible areal influence cross-linguistically: [3] refers 
to a conjectured ‘Viking Fall’ in relation to declarative rises in 
Eastern Norwegian [23], while rises in UNB English varieties 
have been ascribed to Celtic influence (“Irish falls, which, 
perversely, go up” [14]). While reportedly rare, these unmarked 
declarative rises not only challenge assumptions about the 
mapping between pitch and illocutionary typology, but also 
merit further investigation into their phonetic properties and 
possible phonological representation. 
1.2. Venetan Rises 
Venetan is an (Italo-)Romance language spoken widely in the 
Veneto (NE Italy), as well as diasporic communities across the 
world. It exists in a relationship of societal bilingualism [24] 
with (a regional variety of) Italian, a sister-descendent of Latin. 
Prosodic studies of Italo-Romance languages are generally 
scarce (compared with regional varieties of Italian), and little 
research has been carried out on Venetan in particular, despite 
it being very distinct from other Italo-Romance varieties, and 
noted anecdotally for its ‘lilting’ intonation [25]. [26] makes 
passing reference to the optional presence of rise( -falls) in 
‘emphatic’ speech in veneziano, i.e. the dialect of Venetan 
spoken in Venice, with “complete” broad focus declaratives 
(BFDs) being characterised by a falling nuclear tune.  
Veneziano is unrepresentative of Venetan, however, not 
least linguistically [25], [27], [28]. There is significant variation 
across the Veneto, and studies on other Venetan dialects are 
rare. However, unmarked declarative rise(-falls) are reported in 
the spontaneous speech of middle-aged speakers of trevigiano, 
an urban central-northern Venetan dialect [29] and in read 
speech by young speakers of Gazzolo dialect, a village in 
central-western Veneto [30]. In [30], which focused exclusively 
on proparoxytones, terminal rise(-falls) were found in half of 
all BFDs (and none in narrow focus) in Gazzolo, but only 
sporadically in the read speech of urban Padua and Venice to 
the east. [30] suggest rise(-fall) declaratives may be more 
common across the Veneto than formal elicitation methods 
capture, and subject to an interplay of sociophonetic factors and 
regional variation. Comparable contours have been reported in 
geographically close varieties of Friulan [31] suggesting 
declarative rises may form part of a broader areal pattern.  
This study further investigates the prevalence, distribution 
and phonetic characteristics of rise( -falls) in Venetan 
declaratives for more spontaneous speech. We predicted these 
would be more prevalent than reported for read speech, and 
especially in those older speakers who seldom use Italian. We 
also predicted that contour choice would not be conditioned by 
word type and lexical stress position, but that tonal crowding in 
oxytonic words would affect the alignment of the contour. 
2. Methods 
2.1. Participants, materials and procedure 
Our data were taken from recordings made of semi-spontaneous 
conversations with mother-tongue speakers of gambellarese. 
Gambellara is a small provincial town with approximately 3500 
inhabitants, in central-western Veneto, 38 km east of Verona 
and 20km west of Vicenza. It also lies approximately 13 km 
from Gazzolo, one of the locations investigated by [30], and so 
is comparable in terms of linguistic variety. The recordings 
form part of a wider study on Venetan intonation, involving a 
3716
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2691
total of 25 participants, divided into 2 age groups, with the 
younger speakers ranging from 19-30 years, and older speakers 
ranging from 59-81 years. The recordings were conducted by 
the second author (a native speaker of gambellarese), and 
involved a series of tasks, including semi -spontaneous 
conversation. 
 For the present study, we focus on the speech of older 
participants, since older inhabitants of Gambellara are 
predominantly monolingual dialectophones, at least in terms of 
daily functionality, only using (regional) Italian in specific 
contexts. Their speech is thus arguably as minimally influenced 
by Italian, and thus Italian intonation, as is possible in 
contemporary Italian society. In contrast, younger speakers of 
gambellarese are all bilingual with Italian, with Italian typically 
as their dominant language. For this study, we analysed the 
speech of 8 older speakers (59-81 years), focusing on the 
recordings of semi-spontaneous conversation, semi-structured 
conversation doubling as a sociolinguistic background 
questionnaire, and a semi-structured map task based on certain 
lexical items. The recordings of these tasks over the 5 speakers 
totalled 1 hour and 22 minutes of speech. The recordings were 
carried out (mostly) in a quiet room in the local school or in 
participants’ homes. A ZOOM H1n Handy Recorder, set at 
44,100 Hz sample rate with 16-bit quantization, was placed on 
a table stand at approximately 20 cm from the participants’ 
mouths. Any experimental stimuli were shown on a laptop 
computer screen.  
2.2. Data segmentation, categorisation and labelling 
Data identification, categorization, and annotation were carried 
out by the second author and checked by the first author (who 
is familiar with Venetan). Through visual inspection, and 
auditory and linguistic judgment, all instances of declaratives 
were identified and, through careful evaluation of information 
structure and pragmatic intent in the wider context,  
subsequently categorized according to type of focus, 
distinguishing instances of broad focus from those with any 
kind of narrow focus. Tokens for which information structure 
or pragmatic intent were not definitively clear, or were deemed 
to show marked production, e.g. exclamatory force, were 
excluded. To avoid the possibility of mistakenly including 
declaratives with continuation rises, only phrases that could 
clearly be identified as complete, full intonational phrases (IPs) 
were included.   
The resulting set of BFD tokens were orthographically 
annotated and assigned to one of three lexical stress conditions 
in the nuclear word, namely oyxtonic (e.g. leon /leˈon/ ‘lion’), 
paroxytonic (e.g. canguro /kanˈɡuɾo/ ‘kangaroo’) and 
proparoxytonic (e.g. anara /ˈanaɾa/ ‘duck’). An initial 
qualitative categorization of nuclear tunes was conducted, 
combining auditory analysis and visual inspection of the  
fundamental frequency (f0) contour overlaid on the 
spectrogram (in Praat [32]), based on the shape of the f0 curve 
from the beginning of the nuclear syllable to the end of the 
intonational phase. This first analysis revealed that tokens fell 
into three broad categories of nuclear tune: FALL (Fig. 1), 
RISE (Fig. 2) and RISE-FALL (Fig. 3). Each token was 
checked for naturalness, breadth of focus, lexical stress 
condition and broad token type, by both authors, and any 
differences between annotators reconciled or the relevant 
tokens discarded. This left a total of 269 tokens of BFDs in full 
IPs, for quantitative analysis. 
 
Figure 1: f0 contour for broad focus declarative FALL: [e me 
rai:ze] “my roots”, with nuclear and pre-nuclear syllables. 
 
Figure 2: f0 contour for broad focus declarative RISE: [mi sto 
bɛ̃(ŋ)] “I’m fine”, with nuclear and pre-nuclear syllables. 
 
Figure 3: f0 contour for broad focus declarative RISE-FALL: 
[abastantsa bɛ̃(ŋ)] ‘quite well’, with nuclear and pre-nuclear 
syllables. 
After careful inspection of the data, we decided to collapse 
RISE and RISE-FALL into a single level RISE, resulting in a 
two-level category for contour: i) FALL; ii) RISE(-FALL). We 
justified this on account of the following: i) Previous studies, 
e.g. [30], have treated RISES and RISE-FALLS as likely 
allotonic for Venetan; ii) there is a possibility that variation 
between RISES and RISE-FALLS is partly mediated by the 
availability of segmental material (RISES are more frequent for 
oxytonics, while RISE-FALLS are more numerous for non-
oxytonics); iii) distinguishing RISES from RISE-FALLS would 
result in even smaller numbers of tokens per cell , thereby 
compromising statistical robustness. 
Oxytones are relatively frequent in Venetan (around a 
quarter of our corpus), as evident from Table 1, whereas 
proparoxytones were infrequent. A Pearson's Chi-squared test 
with Yates’ continuity correction run on the collapsed data (in 
bold) revealed no significant association between contour 
e me ɾa ˈiː ze
pn n
0
500
100
200
300
400
Pitch (Hz)
Time (s)
0.5028 1.309
3717
category and word type (χ²(1) = 0.008, p = 0.929). Since the 
main parameter of interest for word category was the possible 
effects of tonal crowding in oxytones, we decided to collapse 
paroxytones with proparoxytones, resulting in a 2-level 
category: i) oxytonic; ii) non-oxytonic, and broadly comparable 
numbers of FALLS and RISE(-FALLS) among BFDs. 
Table 1: Total number of tokens observed for each 
contour category and lexical stress type. 
 Fall Rise Rise
-fall 
Rise(-
fall) 
Total 
oxytonic 31 19 9 28 59 
paroxytonic 103 35 55 90 193 
proparoxytonic 11 1 5 6 17 
non-oxytonic 114 36 60 96 210 
Total 145 55 69 124 269 
2.3. Region of Interest and extracting contours 
To quantitatively compare contours, it was first necessary to 
annotate and extract the relevant part. For each token we thus 
identified and annotated the nuclear syllable (‘n’) and  then 
determined and annotated the boundaries of our Region of 
Interest (RoI). For our analysis of BFDs, we defined the RoI as 
that interval elapsing between the start of the syllable preceding 
the nuclear syllable and the end of the utterance. Thus, the RoI 
captures the whole of the nuclear tone unit, comprising the 
nuclear pitch accent, plus phrasal and boundary tones.  
 
Figure 4: Region of Interest for different word types. 
The RoI inevitably spans a varying number of syllables: 2 
syllables for oxytonic; 3 syllables for paroxytonic ; and 4 
syllables for proparoxytonic. This also affords insight into the 
possible influence of stress position and varying availability 
and duration of postnuclear segmental material on the 
implementation of the nuclear tune. This is particularly relevant 
for Venetan, for which apocope is frequent (affecting final 
unstressed mid vowels after /n/, in the variety under 
investigation here [28], resulting in more oxytonic words than 
in Italian). It allows scrutiny of possible effects of tonal 
crowding, whereby both nuclear pitch accents and edge tones 
vie for space on final syllables. Including the pre -nuclear 
syllable in the RoI affords insight into the approach to the 
nuclear tune, including any differences as a function of the 
amount of post-nuclear segmental material. F0 curves were 
extracted in R [33] using the packages readtextgrid [34], 
praatsauce and sauceshelf [35], with f0 sampled at 10 ms 
intervals. The extracted f0 tracks were subsequently corrected 
where needed using PitchMendR [36] and converted to 
semitones by speaker, to ensure comparability across speakers. 
Average curves for each sub-category were created using the 
ggplot2 package in R. Relative average time stamps marking 
nuclear syllable boundaries were calculated by transforming the 
time values into relative values within the RoI, which were then 
averaged across tokens by word type. Generalized Additive 
Mixed Models (GAMMs) were built for analysis of statistical 
difference using the mgcv package [37]. Following [38], three 
GAMMs were fitted to enable model comparison using bam(): 
(i) a full model including contour type (F, R) and word type 
(oxytonic, non-oxytonic) as parametric terms, together with 
corresponding by-factor smooths over normalised RoI duration; 
(ii) a reduced model excluding both parametric and smooth 
terms for contour type; and (iii) a reduced model excluding the 
parametric and smooth terms for word type. Models were 
compared using Maximum Likelihood (ML) to assess overall 
factor significance. To account for speaker-specific variation 
and reduce residual autocorrelation, random smooths for 
speaker and token were included via factor-smooth interactions 
in all models. Difference smooth plots were generated using 
itsadug. 
3. Results 
The model comparisons revealed significant overall effects of 
both contour type (difference = 122.874, df = 5, p < .001) and 
word type (difference = 25.909, df = 5, p < .001). Looking more 
closely at differences between contour types, there was a 
significant parametric effect of contour (p < 0.01), with RISE(-
FALLS) showing an overall higher f0 than FALLS (for both 
word categories). There was also a significant non-linear effect 
of contour (p < 0.001), with RISE(-FALLS) differing in shape 
from FALLS. These differences are visualised in Figures 5a-b, 
with difference in both shape and f0 height apparent towards 
the contour end (significant between 0.596 and 1.000 along 
relative time). 
 Turning to word type, there was a significant non-linear 
effect of this factor, indicating that oxytonic contours differ in 
shape from non-oxytonic contours (p < .01). This suggests that 
the implementation of a specific contour may be conditioned by 
the availability or otherwise of segmental material. There was 
also a significant parametric effect of word type (p < 0.01), with 
oxytonic tokens showing an overall higher pitch than non -
oxytonic tokens. In summary, i) RISE( -FALLS) have a 
different shape from FALLS (confirming our qualitative 
categorization) and are produced with a higher overall pitch 
than FALLS; ii) contours on oxtyonic tokens are also produced 
with a different shape and on a higher overall pitch than those 
on non-oxytonic tokens.  
Figs 6a-b show f0 smooths (in semitones) for both contour 
types, for both oxytonic and non-oxytonic tokens, with mean 
location of the nuclear syllable (i.e., between dashed vertical 
lines). These reveal more clearly how different contour points 
are anchored segmentally, and how this differs across the two 
word types. 
In all cases, the nuclear tone unit is preceded by an H tone, 
which inspection of individual f0 contours showed to be 
typically located two syllables before the nuclear syllable.  
Across both word types, FALLS involve a consistent fall during 
the nuclear syllable, followed by further lowering to the edge of 
the phrase (clear from the post-nuclear segmental material in 
non-oxytonic tokens). Over the RoI (which includes the pre-
nuclear syllable), this could be modelled as the interpolation of 
a sequence of HLL targets. With regard to RISE( -FALLS), 
while the tail end of a fall can be seen during the nuclear 
syllable in non-oxytonic tokens, the nuclear syllable is mostly 
characterised by a marked low trough, either reached 
approximately halfway through the nuclear syllable (for non-
oxytonics) or shortly after its onset (for oxytonics). This is 
followed by a rise to a peak reached during the final syllable, 
and in non-oxytonics may be followed by a fall. Over the RoI 
(which includes the pre -nuclear syllable), this could be 
modelled as the interpolation of a sequence of HLH (oxytonic) 
or HLHL (non-oxytonic), although, as Table 1 shows, cases of 
HLHL for oxytonics and HLH for non -oxytonics are also 
possible and not infrequent. 
Pre 
 Nuclear 
 
Post 
 Post 
oxytonic 
paroxytonic 
proparoxytonic 
3718
 
Figures 5a-b: GAMM-generated smooth difference plot 
between RISE-(FALLS) and FALLS (full model; sig. dif. 
between 59.6% - 100% of normalized duration). 
 
Figures 6a-b: f0 smooths (semitones) for FALLS (red) and 
RISE(-FALLS) (blue), for oxytonics and non-oxytonics. 
4. Discussion 
Our study shows a high incidence of BFD RISE(-FALLS) in 
this variety of Venetan, with 47% of all BFDs having a RISE(-
FALL), for semi-spontaneous (unscripted) conversation by 
older speakers. Contrary to predictions, however, this was not 
more prevalent than what has been reported for read speech; 
indeed, [30] report almost exactly the same proportion (50%) 
of RISE(-FALLS) in read speech by younger speakers, for a 
similar rural community in central-western Veneto.  
 This generalisability across the two studies, over speakers 
of different ages and for different speech registers, suggests that 
RISE(-FALLS) are a robust feature either specifically of this 
geographical variety of Venetan, and/or more generally of a 
relatively rural setting in the Veneto. Furthermore, it confirms 
speakers have a choice between two contours for signalling 
unmarked declaratives. It remains to be seen whether this 
choice, and its prevalence, is available elsewhere in the Veneto 
for more spontaneous settings, as [30] propose, and as 
suggested by [29]’s data from Treviso. Either way, it points to 
BFDs potentially constituting a valuable diagnostic tool for 
investigating sociolinguistic codeswitching between ‘local’ 
(Venetan) and ‘national’ or supra-regional (Italian influenced 
by closely related Italo-Romance varieties) forms, and for 
understanding the dynamic bilectal situation in the Veneto. 
While [30] had confirmed RISE(-FALLS) to be as 
prevalent as FALLs for proparoxytonic words alone (since this 
was the only word type they examined), our findings show they 
are roughly as prevalent as FALLS also in paroxytones and 
oxytones. (We note that our present corpus contains too few 
samples of proparoxytones to draw any conclusions for 
gambellarese). This strongly indicates that contour choice 
between FALL and RISE(-FALL) in BFDs is orthogonal to 
word type and lexical stress position , as predicted in §1. 
However, our statistical analysis of contour shape revealed that 
oxytones and non-oxytones have a different shape. As observed 
in Table 1, within the general category of RISE(-FALLS), there 
is a tendency for oxytones to have RISES (two thirds) and for 
non-oxytones to have RISE-FALLS (two thirds). This tendency 
suggests that the choice between RISES and RISE-FALLS may 
be conditioned by the availability of segmental material. On this 
interpretation, RISES – in oxytones at least – would be the 
surface realization of a truncated RISE-FALL. We note that this 
is potentially a strategy for the avoidance of tonal crowding.  
Further investigation including alignment measures may help to 
verify this. 
More data and analysis are needed to determine a 
phonological interpretation, not least taking into consideration 
the wider system which, in gambellarese, displays other kinds 
of RISE-(FALLS), e.g. for narrow focus and polar questions. 
Until such a wider investigation has been conducted, only a 
tentative analysis can be made. The FALLS suggest either L* 
L-L% or, perhaps more likely, H+L* L-L%, given the 
consistency of the fall during the nuclear syllable itself, and 
possibly showing Italian influence, which also has H+L* L-L% 
for BFDs [39]. With RISE(-FALLS), a low trough is reached 
earlier, dominating the nuclear syllable (in non-oxytones) or 
occurring at the start of it (in oxytones), making the plausibility 
of an L* nuclear pitch accent greater here. Subject to further 
analysis of pre-nuclear tonal alignment, H+L* is also possible 
here. Thus, there is a possible difference in nuclear pitch accent 
between FALLS and RISE(-FALLS), which requires further 
careful analysis. Why there might be two variants for the 
declarative nuclear pitch accent is an open question, but given 
the deep, historic bilectalism in the Veneto, it is plausibly the 
result of prosodic transfer from linguistic contact with Italian. 
Starkly different is the post-nuclear tonal configuration, 
interpretable as H-L% (RISE-FALLS) and H-H% (RISES). The 
resulting tunes, L* H-H% and L* H-L%, are consistent with 
phonological analyses of rises and rise-falls in UNB English. 
An alternative interpretation is to consider the rise as part of the 
nuclear pitch accent (i.e. L*+H), a possibility not excluded here, 
but which seems less likely on the grounds that, when there is 
sufficient segmental material, H is consistently post-nuclear. 
5. Conclusions 
Whatever the phonological interpretation, our study confirms 
the prevalent use of an alternative RISE(-FALL) nuclear tune 
for unmarked declaratives, in at least central Venetan varieties. 
This tune is starkly distinct from the other variant, a FALL, 
closer to Italian and other Italo-Romance varieties. Work is in 
progress to determine the prevalence of the RISE(-FALL) for 
spontaneous speech in other Venetan varieties, and if it 
constitutes a sociolinguistic marker of localness, variably used 
across the region, potentially having arisen through contact 
transfer with Italian. Further work is needed to see if variation 
between RISES and RISE -FALLs depends on structural 
properties (as claimed for many UNB Engl