Not Quite My Tempo:
V oice Activity-aware Speech Synthesis for Lip-Synchronous Dubbing
Alejandro P´erez-Gonz´alez-de-Martos ID 1,∗∗, Florian Lux ID 1, Angelina Elizarova1,
Milana Shkhanukova1, Andreas Kellner1, Mattia Antonino Di Gangi ID 1
1 AppTek GmbH, Germany
aperez@apptek.com, flux@apptek.com
Abstract
Automatic lip-synchronous dubbing requires a speech synthe-
sis model to generate alternating voice and silence patterns in
the target language that match the timing of the source clip pre-
cisely to ensure an optimal viewing experience. Prior works
address this problem by conditioning the speech synthesis pro-
cess on lip movements extracted from the video signal. In this
work, we condition the speech generation on a binary voice-
activity signal, which has a lightweight representation and can
be produced in multiple ways. We show that the model follows
the voice-activity signal with high accuracy while maintaining
natural prosody and semantically appropriate pause placement
within sentences, as demonstrated through extensive objective
and subjective evaluations. By randomly masking this condition
during training, we make the feature entirely optional during in-
ference, allowing editors to enforce or relax lip-sync constraints
when desired.
Index Terms: speech synthesis, voice activity detection,
prosody cloning, automatic dubbing
1. Introduction
While modern text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis has evolved
through paradigms like regression, next-token prediction, trans-
port functions or inpainting, the application of these methods
to automatic dubbing introduces unique challenges. The goal
extends beyond simple translation to the creation of a seam-
less cross-lingual experience. Consequently, alignment must be
multidimensional, encompassing not only voice identity, style
and intent, but interestingly and uniquely, also the precise tem-
poral mapping of pause structures. The temporal axis of the
target speech must be precisely mapped to the source to main-
tain the visual-audio coherence required for lip-sync dubbing.
To this end, we propose an approach that incorporates a
V oice Activity Detection (V AD) stage to generate frame-level
binary masks. These voice activity annotations provide the tem-
poral conditioning necessary to condition an inpainting-based
synthesis process [1, 2] during training. At inference time, the
model continues to leverage the V AD-derived mask, which is
now derived from the reference audio in the source language.
Owing to the inpainting paradigm operating on a fixed-length
canvas, the binary voiced/unvoiced pattern can be seamlessly
propagated from the source signal to the target, since both are
defined over the same number of frames. This design constrains
only the temporal structure of speech activity, while leaving
the allocation of linguistic content within voiced regions to the
model, which is trained end-to-end. Notably, although no ex-
plicit constraints on pause placement are imposed beyond the
**indicates the corresponding author.
French Reference Audio
English Translation TTS with V AD Condition
English Translation TTS without V AD Condition
Figure 1:Example of our proposed technique in action: The
VAD condition encourages the model to use only the blue area
as canvas for inpainting-TTS. Silences are aligned on the time
axis, which is a requirement in lip-synchronous dubbing.
activity mask, we find the model consistently learns to position
pauses at linguistically coherent boundaries. To illustrate this,
we provide example audios taken from our subjective evalua-
tion, as well as examples from our qualitative analysis.1
While numerous works have explored methods for trans-
ferring voice timbres and speaking style [3, 4, 5, 6], few in-
vestigated the problem of achieving precise temporal alignment
between source and target utterances. Exact prosody matching
is explored in research fields such as voice privacy [7], deep-
fake detection [8, 9], and literary studies [10], but these settings
assume identical source and target texts. This assumption does
not reflect the challenges of dubbing.
Most existing approaches for prosodic alignment across dif-
fering utterances in dubbing and similar contexts attempt to
address this challenge by leveraging visual cues from a video
stream, for example by encoding lip movements into embed-
dings that condition the text-to-speech system [11, 12, 13]. In
contrast, our method relies solely on audio-text data and does
not require paired video during training, eliminating a major
practical constraint. Additionally, our approach is decoupled
from the problem of detecting the primary speaking face and
modeling its lip dynamics, a process that can be brittle in out-
of-domain scenarios such as cartoons, anime, or scenes with
multiple visible speakers, and may require specialized encoders.
Effective prosody transfer in lip-sync dubbing requires
translations that accommodate the pacing and length of the orig-
inal speech. In traditional professional workflows, human ex-
perts manually adapt the translated script to satisfy these rigid
lip-sync constraints, but recent research has sought to automate
the process through dubbing-specific machine translation (MT).
Isochronous MT aims at generating target text that matches
the source duration by aligning syllable or phoneme counts
1https://alexdemartos.github.io/NQMT_IS26
5409
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1407
[14, 15, 16]. Additionally, some works focused on transferring
explicit text pause markers from source to target to provide a
richer signal to speech synthesis [17]. These lines of work are
complementary to ours, as a speech synthesis system still needs
to render the written translation according to the dubbing re-
quirements. In the present work, we assume that a given trans-
lation has a sufficiently matching timing structure, but we do
not require explicit additional prosodic information.
2. Methods
2.1. Basic TTS Setup
Our model architecture loosely follows F5-TTS [1, 18] with
a few modifications. Figure 2 provides a schematic overview
of the system. First, we replace filler-token-based upsampling
with the average upsampling method proposed in ZipV oice [2],
which provides a stronger inductive bias toward near-diagonal
temporal alignment between input and target sequences. Sec-
ond, our model addresses zero-shot speaker and style trans-
fer via explicit speaker embeddings [3] and Global Style To-
kens (GST) [4] as opposed to acoustic prompt-based condition-
ing (inpainting), leading to improved disentanglement of tim-
bre, style, and accent. Finally, we adopt a pretrained, modified
SoundStream [19] vocoder which maps 16 kHz waveforms to
32-dimensional scalar-quantized latent codes [20] and gener-
ates 48 kHz high-fidelity outputs [21].
2.2. V oice Activity Conditioning
The main novelty of this method is the introduction of a voice
activity mask to condition audio generation. For each acoustic
frame, voice activity is encoded as a binary indicator of speech
presence or absence. This signal is embedded and added to the
encoder representations, providing the Diffusion Transformer
(DiT) [22] Flow Matching decoder with explicit temporal voice
activity cues. A schematic illustration is provided in Figure 2.
To enable controllability of voice activity adherence at in-
ference time, we randomly mask a subset of the ground-truth
voice activity embeddings during training. This allows selective
masking of frames around speech–silence transition regions,
which can be useful in post-editing workflows. Fully masking
the voice activity signal effectively removes V AD conditioning
from the model, allowing the system to operate both with and
without V AD guidance. This flexibility is motivated by the ob-
servation that strict lip-syncing constraints are not required in
ConvNeXt 
Encoder
Average 
Upsampling
Diffusion Transformer
SoundStream 
(FSQ)
Global Reference 
Representations
wʌntəθri
Input Text: 
“One Two Three” w ʌ n t ə θ r iʌ t ə θ r it ə rw n θw ʌ n i
1 1 0 0 1 1 0 11 1 1 0 1 11 1 11 0 01 1 0 1
Phonemizer
Voice Activity 
Detection
Global Reference 
Representations
Global Reference 
Representations
Reference Audio
(t−1)x0+tx1
Figure 2:Overview of the proposed architecture with VAD con-
ditioning. During training, VAD labels are randomly masked,
enabling optional use of this feature at inference time.
all scenarios: one large-scale study reports that such alignment
is present in movies only about 12% of the time [23]. More-
over, accommodating non-adapted translations (e.g., standard
MT outputs) under rigid lip-sync constraints is inherently diffi-
cult. Our results further indicate that, in some cases, enforcing
such alignment may compromise other aspects of voice quality.
3. Experiments
3.1. Data
We provide results for two models: a core English model trained
on the publicly available LibriTTS-R corpus [24, 25] to en-
sure reproducibility, alongside a multilingual model trained on
a larger combination of public and proprietary data sources.
For evaluation, we utilize a subset of the Multilingual TEDx
(mTEDx) dataset [26]. This corpus provides diverse source-to-
English language pairs for comprehensive cross-lingual assess-
ment. Moreover, the semi-spontaneous nature of TEDx talks,
characterized by frequent and irregular pauses, offers a more
rigorous test than traditional read-speech corpora. Leverag-
ing such challenging dynamic speech patterns allows us to ef-
fectively validate our approach’s precision in managing timing
constraints under realistic conditions. To this end, we curated a
test set of utterances with durations between 7 and 15 seconds,
each containing at least one pause exceeding 500 ms. The fi-
nal evaluation set comprises 291 samples, balanced across four
source languages: Greek, French, Portuguese and Russian. For
subjective assessments, a random subset of 25 samples was se-
lected from this pool; this sample size was constrained to main-
tain a reasonable evaluation time and mitigate rater fatigue.
3.2. Experimental Setup
The proposed model operates on phoneme sequences, which are
mapped to 1024-dimensional embeddings and contextualized
via an 8-layer ConvNeXt encoder. The encoder outputs are up-
sampled to the target sequence length using the average upsam-
pling method from ZipV oice. We perform cross-lingual voice
and style transfer using explicit conditioning embeddings. To
condition the model on the voice-timbre of a reference we em-
ploy a stack of pretrained speaker encoders (FACodec [27] and
ERes2NetV2 [28]), while prosodic and emotional cues are cap-
tured by a GST-based encoder [4]. These embeddings are added
to the DiT blocks using Adaptive Layer Normalization [22]. To
ensure robustness against noisy references, we apply data aug-
mentation to the GST encoder inputs during training.
Frame-level voice activity information is extracted using
the Silero V AD model.2 As discussed in Section 2.2, we ap-
ply random masking to the voice activity embeddings during
training to enhance model controllability. The vector field is
parametrized by an 18-layer DiT decoder (d= 1024, 8 atten-
tion heads) and optimized via the optimal-transport Conditional
Flow Matching objective [29, 30]. All models are trained using
a global batch size of 128 across four NVIDIA A100 GPUs. We
use a peak learning rate of 7e−5 with a linear warmup of 10k
steps, decayed to 5e−6 over 800k steps. To enable classifier-
free guidance (CFG) at inference time [31], conditioning inputs
are dropped with a probability of 20% during training.
3.3. Alignment Consistency
To assess the model’s ability to adhere to voice activity masks,
we compute frame-level V AD accuracy metrics between the
2https://github.com/snakers4/silero-vad
5410
2
4
6
8
10
12
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
2
4
6
Pyannote VAD
 Silero VAD
 TEN VAD
Accuracy Score
DensityDensity
Model conditioned on VAD
Model not conditioned on VAD
Figure 3:Comparison of the distribution density of the accura-
cies per sample, measured by different VAD models.
reference and synthesized audios from the mTEDx test set.
Table 1 presents frame-level V AD alignment accuracy scores
for various source languages under both conditioned and un-
conditioned settings. Across all languages, regardless of each
language’s unique features, V AD conditioning significantly
improves alignment performance, increasing accuracy from
roughly 73% without conditioning (overlap by chance) to about
96% with conditioning for the model trained on LibriTTS-R,
and similarly for our multilingual model. These findings con-
firm that explicit V AD guidance is highly effective in enforcing
temporal alignment. We hypothesize that the slightly lower ac-
curacy of the multilingual model stems from the increased dif-
ficulty of V AD in our multilingual dataset due to frequent non-
speech events occurring, such as e.g. hesitations or laughter, as
well as other voice modes, such as e.g. yelling and whispering.
To ensure the accuracy evaluation is not overly influenced
by a particular V AD system, we use two additional state of the
art V AD models to measure the accuracy of the model outputs.
Figure 3 shows the density distributions of the accuracy scores
for both conditioned and unconditioned synthesis across Pyan-
note [32], TEN 3, and Silero. While these can vary in sensi-
tivity, the conditioned synthesis (top) demonstrates consistently
higher accuracy scores across all three V AD systems.
Precise onset and offset timings are critical for high-quality
dubbing. We evaluate this by measuring the temporal offsets of
silence boundaries between the source and synthesized speech.
Figure 4 shows the distribution of these timing offsets, aver-
aged across the evaluation set. When conditioned on V AD, the
3https://github.com/TEN-framework/ten-vad
Table 1:Silero VAD alignment accuracy per source language,
with and without VAD conditioning. No VAD accuracy shows
overlap by chance in each language.
LibriTTS Model Multilingual Model
Source No V AD V AD No V AD V AD
Greek 66.95% 96.06% 66.06% 91.28%
French 68.65% 96.09% 68.80% 92.21%
Portuguese 75.17% 95.97% 73.06% 91.67%
Russian 81.17% 96.74% 78.50% 91.14%
Total72.69% 96.21% 71.35% 91.59%
−4 −2 0 2 4 6
 −10 −5 0 5
VAD
 No VAD
Seconds Seconds
Mean Start Diﬀerence Mean End Diﬀerence
Figure 4:Visualizing the deviation on the time axis of silence
starts and silence ends, averaged across each sample.
boundary deviations are tightly concentrated around zero, indi-
cating high temporal precision. In contrast, the model without
V AD conditioning exhibits a wider spread across both positive
and negative deviations.
3.4. Prosody Naturalness
While V AD conditioning ensures temporal alignment, the
model must also maintain semantic and prosodic coherence
through appropriate pause placement and dynamic pacing to fit
the target duration. To evaluate these aspects, we performed a
subjective evaluation with 40 English native speakers recruited
via the Prolific crowd-working platform. 4 Participants were
compensated fairly according to high ethical standards. Using
the subjective test set described in Section 3.1, we synthesized
the English translations with and without V AD conditioning for
both our LibriTTS and multilingual variants. Each participant
evaluated 48 audio samples, derived from 12 randomly selected
references (out of a pool of 25) across all four model configura-
tions. Raters provided scores on a 5-point Likert scale regard-
ing the naturalness of pause locations (Placement MOS) and the
overall naturalness of pacing and intonation (Prosody MOS).
The distribution of subjective ratings is illustrated in Fig-
ure 5, with aggregated MOS reported in Table 2. While a
marginal decrease in both scores was observed when the V AD
conditioning is enabled, the difference is not statistically signif-
icant according to pairwise Mann-Whitney U tests [33] (p >
0.05for all pairwisep). These findings suggest that V AD
conditioning does not degrade the perceived naturalness of the
prosody despite the added temporal constraints. Furthermore, it
indicates that the model maintains the ability of placing pauses
at semantically appropriate locations. We further investigate the
outlier samples with the lowest rating scores in Section 4.
3.5. Robustness
The impact of V AD conditioning on synthesis robustness is as-
sessed via Word Error Rate (WER) using an internal propri-
etary ASR system, complemented by Intelligibility and Prosody
scores from the TTSDS benchmark suite [34, 35]. These re-
4https://www.prolific.com/
Table 2:Mean Opinion Scores rated on a 5-point Likert scale
with standard deviation. Each score is based on 40 ratings.
Model Placement Prosody
LibriTTS No V AD 3.80±0.98 3.71±1.04
LibriTTS V AD 3.74±1.04 3.68±1.14
Multilingual No V AD 3.82±1.02 3.81±1.03
Multilingual V AD 3.73±1.05 3.68±1.09
5411
1 2 3 4 50
50
100
150
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 50
50
100
150
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
VotesVotes
❌  VAD - LibriTTS - Placement ❌  VAD - Multilingual - Placement ❌  VAD - LibriTTS - Prosody ❌  VAD - Multilingual - Prosody
✅  VAD - LibriTTS - Placement ✅  VAD - Multilingual - Placement ✅  VAD - LibriTTS - Prosody ✅  VAD - Multilingual - Prosody
Figure 5:Subjective evaluation results. There are 3840 individual ratings from 40 participants, split uniformly across all systems and
conditions. Placement MOS (darker, left) and Prosody MOS (lighter, right) denote naturalness of pause locations and overall prosody,
respectively. Rows contrast baseline (top) with VAD-conditioned (bottom) configurations.
sults are summarized in Table 3. We observe a slight increase
in WER for V AD-conditioned synthesis, which is primarily at-
tributed to instances where the translated text is poorly adapted
to the source V AD constraints. In such cases of extreme tem-
poral mismatch, the model may aggressively adjust pacing or
introduce phonetic deletions and repetitions to satisfy the en-
forced timing boundaries. A more detailed qualitative analysis
of such edge cases and their associated error modes is provided
in Section 4.
4. Qualitative Analysis
This section investigates the performance trade-offs observed in
Sections 3.4 and 3.5. Looking at the worst-scoring samples, we
find a strong correlation between low evaluation scores and the
presence of synthesis artifacts, such as phonetic deletions, rep-
etitions, or word reordering. Further analysis of samples with
those defects reveals unique triggers for each error type.
Word omissions typically occur when suboptimal transla-
tions significantly exceed the available temporal budget. No-
tably, the model prioritizes the integrity of the pause structure
over verbatim synthesis. When using constructed examples in
which we gradually increase the number of words with a fixed-
duration reference, the model can maintain alignment even at
speaking rates exceeding the training distribution. However,
once a critical threshold is reached, the model preserves tempo-
ral synchronization by omitting parts of the sentence, ensuring
that the alignment on the time axis remains unaffected.
Similarly, word repetitions are linked to translations with
insufficient text content for the target duration. Again, we ob-
served that the model can reduce the speaking rate to main-
tain alignment without altering the V AD structure until a lower
Table 3:Synthesis robustness objective results: ASR-based
WER and TTSDS benchmark Intelligibility and Prosody scores.
Model WER Intelligibility Prosody
LibriTTS No V AD 8.5% 76.82 85.00
LibriTTS V AD 13.9% 80.59 86.98
Multilingual No V AD 6.3% 78.90 82.96
Multilingual V AD 8.3% 79.72 86.32
bound is reached. Beyond this point, the model eventually re-
sorts to repetitions to occupy the remaining duration rather than
further slowing down or inserting misaligned pauses.
In cases involving word reordering, we identified the pres-
ence of punctuation marks as a significant factor. Further con-
structed examples confirmed that the model has learned a strong
correlation between pauses and punctuation marks, such as
commas and periods. Hence, whenever punctuation occurs near
a V AD silence region, the model attempts to align the two by
speeding up or slowing down the adjacent segments as needed.
Similar to the previous cases, this only worked to some extent.
If the speaking rate modulation became too extreme, the model
preserves the V AD boundary by reordering the text rather than
shifting the pause.
While unadapted translations may induce stability issues,
these were successfully mitigated by manually refining the
text to align with the source V AD structure. This confirms
that the model’s precision remains high when provided with
isochronous input, either from automated isochronous MT or
via human-in-the-loop intervention, to ensure that the transla-
tions are properly adapted to target pause structures.
5. Conclusion
We propose a modification to inpainting-based TTS, which
allows for the automated creation of lip-synchronous dubs
through the use of V AD as condition signal. Our experimental
results show that the model follows the temporal structure of a
reference audio with high accuracy. In subjective and objective
evaluation of prosody and robustness, we observe only a minor
degradation when using the proposed method, which we link to
poorly adapted translations, unlike the ones that would be used
in a typical high-quality dub. We aim to address this limita-
tion in future work through specially constructed training data
to reduce the reliance on accurate isochronous MT or a human-
in-the-loop. Furthermore, we aim to enhance this approach by
incorporating more fine-grained lip-dynamic information from
the source audio, for instance by extracting phonetic content
and mapping it to corresponding articulatory configurations.
Disclosure of Generative AI Tool Use
Generative AI tools were used to assist with minor grammatical
corrections and stylistic improvements. These were not used to
generate scientific content, results, analysis, or interpretations.
5412