Two Lessons Learned from the SGILE project:
Efficient Building and Evaluation of TTS Voices
Aidan Pine ID 1,∗, Korin Richmond ID 2,∗
1 National Research Council, Canada
2 University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
aidan.pine@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca, korin.richmond@ed.ac.uk
Abstract
In line with the “Speaking Together” theme for Interspeech
2026, our Show & Tell showcases two contributions arising
from recent work on the “Speech Generation for Indigenous
Language Education” (SGILE) project. Both contributions fa-
cilitate building TTS voices for under-resourced languages: 1)
the open-source EveryV oice TTS Toolkit can build high-quality
voices using constrained amounts of audio data typical for
under-resourced languages; 2) we have methodically evaluated
speech evaluation techniques with the aim of maximising in-
sights gained while minimising listener effort, especially impor-
tant when few listeners are available. Our demo takes the form
of a web app which combines both these aspects in a single in-
teractive interface: users can experience first-hand a selection
of EveryV oice TTS voices through a listening test design that
has been little used in the speech synthesis field so far.
Index Terms: under-resourced languages, speech synthesis,
speech evaluation
1. Introduction
Speech technology for around 20-100 of the world’s most high-
resource languages has been developing at an intensive pace in
recent years. These languages have millions of speakers and
abundant audio, text and linguistic resources which large, pow-
erful machine learning models have exploited to take state-of-
the-art performance to a new level. However, these advances
are not easy to extend to most of the world’s other languages.
Of roughly 7,100+ languages spoken in the world today, the
overwhelming majority (over 99%) are classified by NLP prac-
titioners asunder-resourcedfor speech technology purposes
due to the limited amounts of text and speech data available
for these languages. While it should be noted that not all of
these language communities have a use for speech technology,
those who do face a variety of constraints [1]. Like others in the
field, we have been working to address such constraints, and the
aim here is to provide an engaging demo of some of the work
of the “Speech Generation for Indigenous Language Education”
(SGILE) project, and associated publications [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
SGILE (2022-2026), a multi-partner project with the goal of
producing high-quality TTS systems to support the teaching of
Indigenous languages. The SGILE project has addressed key
challenges including: building TTS models to meet the needs
of educators, maximising training data efficiency, and minimis-
ing evaluation effort [3]. Two of the contributions in particular
are addressed here:
The EveryVoice Toolkithas been designed to build high-
quality voices with modest compute and data requirements,
*These authors contributed equally.
specifically to better suit under-resourced conditions 1. This
work challenges assumptions that neural TTS is impossible
without large models and vast data sets [1, 3]. A user-friendly
wizard also makes it easier for non-expert users to create a
voice for their language.
Techniques for efficient evaluationare important to min-
imise listener effort, which is typically highly constrained in
under-resourced settings. SGILE explored paradigms beyond
usual MOS tests, including workshops [4] and forced-choice
alternatives AB and Best Worst-Scaling (BWS), which our
research has shown can be more efficient and robust [2, 5, 6].
2. What is our demo, and why create it?
We have created a demo specifically for the Interspeech 2026
audience in the form of a web app, in order to showcase the
two contributions of the SGILE project outlined above: efficient
building and evaluation of TTS voices.
The web app allows users to hear a variety of audio samples
which show the TTS voice quality that can be easily achieved by
non-expert voice builders using the EveryV oice system. Sam-
ples are taken from voices built with varying amounts of speech
data. By comparing these, listeners can perceive for themselves
how much, or indeed how little, data is needed to achieve good
results. The voice samples in our demo show it is often possible
to train good voices from scratch with only a few hours speech
data. Moreover, the demo includes multiple languages, allow-
ing further comparisons to be drawn across them. By showing
the voices that can be built with only modest amounts of speech
data, we aim both to challenge assumptions that tens, hundreds
or thousands of hours of speech data are needed to train TTS
voices. We also aim to raise awareness around the EveryV oice
TTS toolkit, which is available for any computationally savvy
but non-expert users to build a voice for their own community’s
language with limited amounts of data.
Rather than simply display a static web page of audio sam-
ples for users to click through, we have designed this web app
as a kind of informal listening test. This serves three purposes:
• A more interactive and fun interface is realised – users first
rate a handful of speech samples “blind”, and their ownunbi-
asedperceptions about the voices are then revealed to them.
• Users can visualise how their own perceptions compare to
previous users. Moreover, comparisons are available across
languages (we expect interesting differences to emerge!).
• Users can experience and compare for themselves answer-
ing BWS versus AB questions. We hope to raise awareness
amongst the speech community of the more efficient and ro-
bust listening test paradigm that BWS can offer [5].
1https://github.com/EveryVoiceTTS/EveryVoice
878
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia

Figure 1:Best-Worst Scaling interface for rating audio samples.
The user selects which sample sounds best (indicated by green
highlight) and which they think sounds the worst (indicated by
red). All responses can then be used to compute and show over-
all preferences to the user (e.g. Fig. 2).
3. Show & Tell Web App Preview
An example screenshot of the web app is given in Figure 1,
which shows the BWS interface for rating audio samples in the
language selected by the user. Each panel presents four audio
stimuli for the user to listen to. The user then selects the one
they think sounds best and the one they think sounds worst. By
listening to just four samples and indicating these two ratings,
the user gives five pair-wise ratings, which would require lis-
tening to 10 audio samples and making 5 selections to obtain
the same number of ratings in the equivalent AB rating setup.
The responses can be used to compute and show comparative
preferences to the user as shown in Fig. 2.
We will have a small number of devices with headphones
available during the demo session for users to interact with our
demo. In addition, a QR code allows users to connect and use
the web app via their own devices (laptop, tablet, or mobile).
4. Further Engagement
Following the completion of SGILE, we now have our next 1-
year “Own Your V oice” (OYV) project currently running. We
are enhancing EveryV oice to allow it to be deployed it in cloud-
based environments that affirm data ownership and control and
are pre-configured with all the software and hardware resources
needed to build voices. Our goal is to make it as frictionless
as possible for non-expert users to build voices for their own
languages. Thus, an additional hope for our demo session is it
will open new contacts with anyone who wants to try out and
give feedback on these newest additions to EveryV oice.
5. Acknowledgments
We are grateful this work has been supported by the National
Research Council of Canada, which funded the “Speech Gen-
eration for Indigenous Language Education (SGILE)” project,
and a UK ESRC Impact Acceleration Award, which funds the
Figure 2:Screenshot of results presented to the user . This in-
terface reveals to the user what voices they have heard and how
they rate them. It also allows comparison to summary ratings
of all users for all languages included in the demo system.
“Own Your V oice (OYV)” project. We are indebted to all
SGILE partners: Onkwawenna Kentyohkwa, University nuh-
elot’ine thaiyots’i nistameyim ˆakanak Blue Quills, WS¯
´ANE ´C
School Board, and the National Institute of Informatics (Japan).
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
No generative AI has been used in the writing of this document.