Better Late Than Never: Meta-Evaluation of Latency Metrics
for Simultaneous Speech-to-Text Translation
Peter Pol´ak ID 1,3, Sara Papi ID 2, Luisa Bentivogli ID 2, Ondˇrej Bojar ID 1
1 Charles University, Czech Republic
2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy 3 AppTek, Germany
polak@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract
Simultaneous speech-to-text translation systems must bal-
ance translation quality with latency. Although quality evalua-
tion is well established, latency measurement remains a chal-
lenge. Existing metrics produce inconsistent results, espe-
cially in short-form settings with artificial presegmentation. We
present the first comprehensive meta-evaluation of latency met-
rics across language pairs and systems. We uncover a struc-
tural bias in current metrics related to segmentation. We in-
troduce Y AAL (Yet Another Average Lagging) for a more ac-
curate short-form evaluation and LongY AAL for unsegmented
audio. We propose SOFTSEGMENTER, a resegmentation tool
based on soft word-level alignment. We show that Y AAL
and LongY AAL, together with SOFTSEGMENTER, outperform
popular latency metrics, enabling more reliable assessments of
short- and long-form simultaneous speech translation systems.
We implement all artifacts within the OMNISTEVALtoolkit:
https://github.com/pe-trik/OmniSTEval.
Index Terms: speech translation, simultaneous translation,
evaluation, metrics, long-form, latency, analysis
1. Introduction
Although translation quality metrics are extensively studied in
offline Speech Translation (ST) and in the related field of ma-
chine translation [1, 2, 3], very little attention has been paid to
latency metrics in Simultaneous Speech Translation (SimulST).
While the most common latency metrics in SimulST [4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9] rely on different approximations, they all base their calcu-
lations on simplifying assumptions, such as uniform word du-
ration, the absence of pauses, and strict monotonic alignment
between source speech and target translation. However, despite
relying on the same assumptions, these metrics often produce
very inconsistent assessments. This inconsistency is clearly il-
lustrated in the results of the IWSLT 2023 Shared Task on Si-
multaneous Translation [10], where different metrics produced
substantially different rankings (see Figure 1). This variability
raises serious concerns about the validity of current evaluation
protocols and their ability to support meaningful comparisons
between systems. Moreover, this risk can be further exacer-
bated when shifting from dealing with already pre-segmented
speech, i.e.,short-formSimulST, to unsegmented audio, i.e.,
long-formSimulST, where information about sentence bound-
aries is not available, further complicating the evaluation [11].
Although [12] showed that reporting a single latency value in
a short-form setting may lead to misleading comparisons, the
underlying reasons for inconsistencies between latency metrics
and their overall reliability remain unclear.
In this paper, we present the first comprehensive meta-
evaluation of latency metrics for SimulST in several aspects,
1533 1521 1983 1917
2460 3777
0.822062 2122
2262 2111
2284 3176 0.83
2237
2377 2347
2237
2260
2881
0.80
2258
2321
2252 2092
2149 2704
0.842331 2380 2363
2220
2255
3058 0.82
True Latency YAAL LAAL AL ATD DAL AP
1
2
3
4
5
CMU HW-TSC CUNI-KIT FBK NAIST
Latency Metric
Rank
Figure 1:Ranking of the systems submitted to the IWSLT 2023
Simultaneous Speech Translation Track according to the True
Latency, the proposed automatic metric YAAL, and the official
five latency metrics.
including diverse systems, language pairs, and short- and long-
form regimes. Through an in-depth analysis of systems submit-
ted to recent IWSLT Simultaneous Speech Translation Shared
Tasks [13, 10, 14], we reveal that existing metrics can lead to
misleading conclusions and hinder effective system design. We
show that the inconsistent evaluations are not primarily due to
the aforementioned assumptions, but rather to a structural bias
in how latency is measured—particularly in how segmentation
influences SimulST models’ behavior. Motivated by these find-
ings, we propose Y AAL (Yet Another Average Lagging), a re-
fined latency metric designed to mitigate the biases present in
existing latency metrics. Using the proposed Y AAL metric, we
identify a “degenerate” behavior in some systems, where the
majority of the translation occurs after the input ends. We in-
troduce a diagnostic test to detect this behavior, enabling practi-
tioners to identify when a system exhibits degeneracy and when
latency metrics may be unreliable. Furthermore, we also show
that resegmentation, which pairs segment-level predictions with
their corresponding reference, is necessary to produce mean-
ingful latency measurements for long-form SimulST. To this
end, we introduce SOFTSEGMENTER, a new resegmentation
tool, and extend our Y AAL to LongY AAL, which deals with
audio streams. Compared to the current alignment tool used
in the speech translation community [15], SOFTSEGMENTER
significantly improves alignment quality, enabling more accu-
rate evaluation in long-form scenarios. The code for Y AAL, its
LongY AAL long-form variant, and SOFTSEGMENTERis avail-
able within the OMNISTEVALtoolkit. 1
2. Background
In the following, we describe the metrics currently used for both
the short-form (§2.1) and long-form (§2.2) regimes. Through-
1https://github.com/pe-trik/OmniSTEval
1656
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-575
out the paper, we assume incremental SimulST systems, i.e.,
systems that cannot revise their outputs because they are not
affected by flickering problems, which are leading current re-
search efforts on the topic [11].
2.1. Short-Form SimulST Latency Metrics
The short-form is the most common evaluation regime of
SimulST [13, 10, 14], where all recordings of the test set
are divided, usually following sentence boundaries, into short
segments of a few seconds. Each segment consists of
source audioX= [x 1,...,x |X|], wherex i is a small por-
tion of raw audio, i.e., the audio chunk, hypothesis transla-
tionY= [y 1,...,y |Y|], and reference translationY R =
[yR
1,...,y R
|YR|]. Each audio chunkx i is fed incrementally to
the system, which concurrently outputs a translation tokenyj at
timestampdj, i.e., the total duration of audio chunks up to and
including the audio chunkxi. In these settings, we describe the
latency metrics operating in the short-form regime.
A verage Proportion (AP;[4])measures the average pro-
portion of input speech read when emitting a target token:
AP= 1
|X||Y|
|Y|X
i=1
di.(1)
A verage Lagging (AL;[5])for simultaneous machine
translation and modified for speech by [16] defines the latency
as the average delay behind an ideal policy:
AL= 1
τ(X)
τ(X)X
i=1
di−d∗
i,(2)
whereτ(X) =min{i|d i =|X||}is the index of the hypothesis
token when the model reaches the end of the source sentence,
also known as the cutoff point. AL considers delays up to and
including the one associated with the token at the cutoff point.
Thei-th delay of the ideal policy is defined asd ∗
i = (i−1)/γ,
whereγ=|Y R|/|X|.
Length-Aware A verage Lagging (LAAL;[7, 8]) is an AL
modification that is robust to overgeneration, i.e., when the hy-
pothesisYis much longer thanY R, which makes the orig-
inal AL produce negative delays when|Y| ≫ |Y R|. To
overcome this problem, which was unduly rewarding over-
generating systems, LAAL modifies theγas follows:γ=
max(|Y|,|Y R|)/|X|.
Differentiable A verage Lagging (DAL;[6])modifies AL
by introducing a minimal delay of1/γafter each step. Un-
like AL and LAAL, DAL considers all tokens in the hypothesis,
without cutoff afteri>τ(X), and instead DAL penalizes each
write operation by at least1/γ:d ′
i = max(di,d′
i−1 + 1/γ),
whered′
1 =d 1.
A verage Token Delay (A TD;[9])assumes that the source
speech, similar to the translation, consists of discrete tokens.
ATD defines a fixed duration for speech tokens of 300ms and
divides the input speech and translation intoCchunks, where
thec-th translation chunky c is translated conditioned on the
source chunkxc and previous translation chunksy 1,...,y c−1.
ATD is then defined as the average delay between each transla-
tion and the corresponding source tokens:
ATD= 1
|Y|
|Y|X
i=1
(T(yt)−T(x a(t))),(3)
whereT(·)is the end time of the source/translation token and
a(t) =
(
s(t),ifs(t)≤L acc(xc(t))
Lacc(xc(t)), otherwise, (4)
is an index of a source token corresponding to translation token
yt, whereLacc(xc)is the number of source tokens in the chunk
xc ands(t) =t−max(0,L acc(yc(t)−1)−L acc(xc(t)−1))
handles the case where more tokens are generated than read,
i.e.,yt is aligned withxt′,t′ <t.
2.2. Long-Form SimulST Latency Metrics
The long-form evaluation regime evaluates SimulST systems
more realistically [11], as it assesses their ability to handle long
audio streams, often spanning several minutes. Since all met-
rics were developed for the short-form regime, recent studies
[17, 18] resorted to resegmentation of translations and delays
based on the reference translation [15], and computed the met-
rics on the segment level. We explain the long-form variant of
LAAL [17] below.
Streaming LAAL (StreamLAAL;[17])extends
the LAAL metric to unsegmented audio streams
S= [X 1,...,X|S|], paired with a continuous stream of
predicted translationsY S. Since reference translations
YR
1,...,Y R
|S| are only available at segment-levelX 1,...,X|S|,
predictionY S = [Y1,...,Y|S|]with the corresponding delays
is segmented based on reference sentencesY R
s to obtain
segment-level predictions. Then, StreamLAAL is computed as:
Stream
LAAL = 1
|S|
|S|X
s=1
1
τ(X s)
τ(X s)X
i=1
di−d∗
i (5)
Whered∗
i = (i−1)·|X s|/max{|Ys|,|Y R
s|}In practice, the
LAAL metric is calculated for every speech segmentX s of the
streamSand its corresponding referenceY R
s with the auto-
matically aligned predictionY s and then averaged over all the
speech segments of the streamX 1,...,X|S|.
Alternatively, [19] proposed an evaluation with resegmenta-
tion provided by the system. The evaluation framework expects
that the system outputs the segment’s start and end timestamps
that align with the source. First, most systems, including all the
IWSLT systems, do not output this information, and relying on
the system’s self-reported alignment might hinder the reliabil-
ity. Second, as we empirically show in §5, relying on potentially
low-quality resegmentation significantly lowers the accuracy of
latency evaluation. Finally, different segmentations render the
observed latencies incomparable across different systems.
3. Overcoming the Pitfalls in SimulST
Latency Metrics
3.1. The Short-Form Regime
The use of audio segmentation in short-form evaluations signif-
icantly affects translation behavior and latency [20]. In practice,
short-form SimulST systems are evaluated in a simulated envi-
ronment where each segment is processed independently [16].
When the entire source segment has been consumed by the sys-
tem, the translation is often still in progress. At that point, the
simulator requests the remaining translation, which the model
emits without any additional delay. This setup introduces two
unrealistic conditions. First, the audio is typically segmented in
1657
0 1 2 3 4 5
Back in New York I am the head of development for a non profit called Robin Hood. When I'm not fighting
Oracle Segmentation:
Zurück
in
New
York
bin
ich
der
Chef
der
Entwicklung
für
eine
gemeinnützige
Organisation
namens
Robin
Hood.
Simultaneous Segmentation:
Zurück
in
New
York
bin
ich
der
Chef
der
Entwicklung
für
eine
gemeinnützige
Organisation
namens
Robin
Hood.
Figure 2:Translations and emission times of a SimulST model. Words in a column were emitted at once, last five words or tail words
“gemeinn¨utzige Organisation namens Robin Hood.” depend on the segmentation:Oracle Segmentation: Known beforehand. Once
the model consumes the entire sentence, it is asked to finish the translation without additional delay.Simultaneous Segmentation: The
evaluation uses an online segmenter that needs extra time (the red area: approximately 0.5s) to decide when the sentence ends.
advance by a human annotator or an automatic model with ac-
cess to the full audio (Oracle Segmentation). Second, the model
is allowed to generate the remaining translation (hereinafter,tail
words) instantaneously once the input segment ends. These fac-
tors unduly distort short-form evaluations, both by providing
high-quality segmentation and eliminating the delay that would
occur in a realistic setting, where the system must wait to con-
firm that the sentence has ended. In a more realistic scenario,
a model has to rely on online segmentation (Simultaneous Seg-
mentation) and thus delay the final translation until it is con-
fident that the input sentence is complete, thereby introducing
extra latency. This discrepancy is illustrated in Figure 2.
Based on these observations, we categorize the existing
short-form latency metrics AL, LAAL, DAL, AP, and ATD into
two groups, depending on whether they compute latency over
all translated words or only a subset. The first group (AP, DAL,
and ATD) includes all translated words in the calculation. DAL
attempts to mitigate the impact of tail words by adding a min-
imum delay of1/γafter each generated word (also within the
same step), thus “spreading” the tail beyond the sentence. How-
ever,1/γsimply reflects the average source-to-target length ra-
tio and does not accurately capture the system behavior for both
the simultaneous words emitted at once and the tail words in
settings without segmentation. If multiple words are emitted
as tail words, DAL can significantly overestimate latency. In
the edge case of a system that waits for an end-of-segment sig-
nal before emitting any words (i.e., an offline system), the DAL
latency value is then equal to the segment length, failing to cap-
ture the system’s true behavior—in this case,undefinedlatency.
AP assigns a delay of 1 to each tail word, as the entire recording
has to be processed to emit that word; thus, the proportion is 1.
Although AP correctly assigns a final latency of 1 to an offline
system (where all words are tail words), it remains sensitive to
segmentation, like DAL, because it treats all tail words equally,
regardless of how many are emitted. ATD also considers all
translated words, including tail words. However, unlike DAL, it
does not apply corrections for tail word behavior, making it the
most sensitive to segmentation artifacts among the three met-
rics. The second group (AL and LAAL) computes the latency
only for words emitted up to and including the cutoff point
τ(X), which marks the first word generated after the end of the
input segment. This corresponds to the word “gemeinn ¨utzige”
in Figure 2. As discussed, in the short-form regime with or-
acle segmentation, theτ(X)-th and following words are often
translated earlier than in a more realistic long-form scenario. As
a result, this cutoff introduces a systematic bias in the latency
estimate, which may lead to either underestimation or overesti-
mation, depending on the system’s policy.
AP, DAL, ATD, AL and, more recently, LAAL have
become established metrics in the short-form evaluation of
SimulST. However, as discussed above, including any of the
tail words in the latency computation leads to a systematic bias
that undermines fair comparisons. To cope with this bias, we
propose a new metric derived from the LAAL metric.
3.1.1. Yet Another Average Latency (YAAL)
We refine the LAAL formulation to better isolate the portion
of the output that is actually produced in simultaneous set-
tings, and we dub the new metricYet Another Average Latency
(Y AAL). Specifically, we define a new cutoff point
τY AAL(X) = max
i
{i|d i <|X|},(6)
which includes only words generatedstrictly before the endof
the input stream. This corresponds to words up to and includ-
ing “eine” in Figure 2, thereby avoiding distortion from tail
words and yielding a more reliable latency estimate that remains
consistent across different segmentation regimes. As we show
in §5, Y AAL provides a more robust latency estimate that better
reflects the true behavior of the system in simultaneous settings.
3.1.2. The Long-Form Regime
The long-form regime offers a more realistic evaluation set-
ting by assessing systems on continuous, unsegmented audio
streams that better reflect real-world use cases. However, the
widely used latency metrics were originally designed for the
short-form regime and do not extend directly to this setting.
First, metrics such as AL, LAAL, and DAL are based on
theγparameter, which represents the average length ratio of
the target-to the source. However,γcan vary substantially be-
tween different segments within the same audio, leading to in-
consistent latency estimates [21]. Second, AP tends to converge
towards 0.5 for long recordings [16]. Finally, ATD assumes
that each speech token has a fixed duration and that source and
target tokens align monotonically—assumptions that are overly
restrictive and especially unrealistic for long-form speech. To
address these challenges, StreamLAAL has introduced the re-
segmentation of long inputs into short segments and is comput-
ing latency on these units. Although StreamLAAL provides an
adaptation of existing metrics to long-form input, it relies on the
MWERSEGMENTERtool [15], which may introduce alignment
errors [22, 18]. When coupled with LAAL, it also computes
latency up to the cutoff wordτ(X i)(Equation (5)), which can
lead to systematic bias, as discussed in §3.1. To overcome these
1658
limitations, we propose a new resegmentation method and an
extension of the Y AAL metric for the long-form regime.
3.1.3.SOFTSEGMENTER
We introduce a new resegmentation method inspired by [18],
employing a softer alignment strategy to more accurately match
the translation output with the reference segments. We start by
lowercasing and tokenizing both the reference and the system
hypotheses. This allows for a more precise alignment around
the sentence ends, especially in cases where the reference and
the model differ in sentence segmentation. Although we change
the text for alignment, we keep the original version to ensure
that the translation quality score remains accurate. Additionally,
we maintain the delay associated with each token and use it
during the alignment process to prevent the alignment of tokens
with future segments, which would lead to spurious negative
latencies. For alignment, we maximize the following score:
S(tr,th) =



−∞s r≥d h,
−∞P(t r)⊕P(r h),
Schar(tr,th)otherwise,
(7)
where the first branch of the equation prevents the alignment
of tokens to future reference segments, wheres r is the start
of the reference segment andd h is the emission time of the
hypothesis token. The second branch prevents the alignment
of punctuation tokens to non-punctuation tokens, wheret r and
th are the reference and hypothesis tokens,P(·)is a function
that indicates if the token is punctuation, and L is exclusive
or. Finally, the last branch computes character-level similar-
ity asS char(tr,th) = (t r∩t h)/(tr∪t h). In the case of
character-based languages, such as Chinese, this reduces to an
exact match.
3.1.4. Long-Form YAAL (LongYAAL)
We also extend Y AAL to the long-form regime—i.e.,
LongY AAL. Unlike StreamLAAL, LongY AAL includes all
words in the latency computation, even those generated beyond
the aligned segment boundariesX s, i.e., alld i fori > τ(Xs).
However, we exclude the final tail words produced after the end
of the full streamS, i.e.,d i fori > τ(P|S|
s=1|Xs|) =τ(X).
This ensures that we include all words emitted beyond the seg-
ment boundariesX s, which are generated in a realistic simul-
taneous manner in the long-form setting, but we do not in-
clude the tail words generated at the end of the entire stream
S, which would introduce bias as discussed in §3.1. Formally,
LongY AAL is defined as
LongY AAL= 1
τ(S)
τ(S)X
s=1
1
τ(X)
τ(X)X
i=1
di−d∗
i,(8)
whereτ(S)is the number of segments that have at least one
word generated before the end of the entire stream, andτ(X)
is the cutoff point that allows only words generated before the
end of the entire streamS. If the streamSconsists of a single
segment, LongY AAL coincides with Y AAL.
4. Experimental Settings
4.1. Data
For the short-form regime, we use systems from the IWSLT
2022 and 2023 Simultaneous Speech Translation tracks [13,
Regime Lang. Pair Dataset Systems / Teams
All Filtering
Short
EN→DE
IWSLT 22 test 68 / 5 46 / 5
IWSLT 23 test 5 / 5 4 / 4
tst-COMMON 71 / 6 49 / 6
EN→JA tst-COMMON 9 / 3 7 / 3
EN→ZH tst-COMMON 14 / 3 7 / 3
Long
EN→DE ACL 6060 dev / IWSLT 25 20 / 6, 10 / 6 —
EN→JA ACL 6060 dev / IWSLT 25 16 / 3, 3 / 2 —
EN→ZH ACL 6060 dev / IWSLT 25 16 / 4, 8 / 4 —
CS→EN IWSLT 24 dev / IWSLT 25 14 / 2, 4 / 2 —
Table 1:Overview of systems in short- and long-form evalu-
ations. “All/Filtering” refers to the number of systems before
and after filtering degenerate systems (see §5; short-form only).
10], along with logs from the MuST-Ctst-COMMONtest
set [23]. For the long-form regime, we use IWSLT 2025
logs: for EN-to-{DE, ZH, JA}, we evaluate on the ACL 60/60
dataset [24] and the IWSLT 2025 test set; for CS-to-EN, we use
the IWSLT 2024 dev set [14] and IWSLT 2025 test set.
In Table 1, we report system statistics that exclude incom-
plete logs (e.g., missing segments, mismatched predictions and
delays, or severely hallucinated outputs).
4.2. Meta-Evaluation Settings
4.2.1. Metrics
True Latency.To enable fair comparisons across latency met-
rics, we require a reference latency reflecting the user experi-
ence, i.e., how long the user needs to wait for translation. Since
human evaluation is infeasible at scale, we adopt a carefully
designed automatic approximation, which we refer to astrue
latency. This is grounded in an intuitive and practical definition
of latency in speech translation:On average, how long does a
user have to wait for a given piece of source information to ap-
pear in the translation?Concretely, we define true latency as
the average delay between each target word and its correspond-
ing source word:
TL= 1
|YA|
|YA|X
i=1
di−dsrc
i ,(9)
whered i is the emission time of the target wordy i, andd src
i
is the corresponding source delay. We define the source delay
as the time when the speaker finished the word if there is only
one corresponding source word, or the last word corresponding
to the target word if the target word aligns with multiple source
wordsdsrc
i = maxl{send
l |(yi,sl)∈A(Y→S)}, wheres end
l
is the end timestamp of the source words l, andA(Y→S)
is the translation alignment between the target and the source.
As discussed in §3.1, computing the latency over all words, in-
cluding tail words, can introduce systematic bias. To mitigate
this, we restrict the true latency calculation to words generated
strictly during simultaneous decoding (i.e., before the end-of-
source signal), and consider only the subset of target words
YA⊆Yaligned to at least one source word, thus avoiding bi-
ases introduced by over or under-generation [7, 8]. This raises
a natural question:Why use automatic latency metrics if true
latency is available?In practice, true latency requires high-
quality transcripts and reliable word-level alignments, which
are often unavailable—especially for low-resource languages.
It also involves multiple processing steps and is substantially
more complex than standard metric evaluation. Importantly, as
1659
shown in §5 and §6, automatic metrics can approximate true
latency with high accuracy when best practices are followed,
making them a practical alternative in most cases.
Score Difference.For the main evaluation, we adopt
the pairwise comparison approach [25]. Rather than indepen-
dently evaluating each system, we examine the difference be-
tween the scores of two systems:∆ =score(System A)−
scor