An investigation of post-stop breathiness in Australian English
Thomas Powell-Davies ID 1,∗∗, Rosey Billington ID 1
1 Australian National University, Australia
thomas.powell-davies@anu.edu.au, rosey.billington@anu.edu.au
Abstract
Stops in English are described as having a voicing contrast.
Phonetically, the contrast in onset position is seen as a distinc-
tion between short- and long-lag V oice Onset Time (VOT). VOT
in onset stops has been studied to some extent in Australian En-
glish and other varieties, revealing a range of between-speaker
variation. However, the release phase of stops can be more com-
plex than what is able to be captured with VOT alone. Recent
work observes periods of breathiness following aspiration for
English voiceless stops, akin to observations for voiceless aspi-
rated stops in languages such as Bengali. This study examines
post-stop breathiness after onset /p, t, k/ in Australian English
wordlist data from Tasmania. Releases with complex transitions
in phonation make up over 40% of the data, with variation in-
fluenced by (socio-)linguistic factors. The way post-aspiration
breathiness is handled has implications for how the stop voicing
contrast is treated in English varieties.
Index Terms: Australian English, phonetics, aspiration, phona-
tion, stops, plosives, VOT
1. Background
1.1. Stop distinctions in Australian English
Australian English is described as having six stop (plosive) con-
sonants: two at each of the bilabial, alveolar and velar places of
articulation, represented as/p, b, t, d, k, g/[1]. The contrast
between/p, t, k/and/b, d, g/in English is usually described
as one of voicing, and consists in large part of a difference in
V oice Onset Time (VOT). VOT can be described as the time be-
tween the release of the articulatory closure and the beginning
of voicing [2]. When measured word/phrase-initially, VOT can
be either positive (a gap between the release of the stop closure
and the subsequent onset of voicing), or negative (a phase of
voicing that starts before the stop closure is released). Cross-
linguistically, the VOT of stop series has been shown to fall
into three main categories [3]. These are known as lead voic-
ing, meaning negative VOT; short-lag VOT, meaning a short
positive VOT (often termed ‘unaspirated’); and long-lag VOT,
meaning a long positive VOT (often termed ‘aspirated’) [4]. In
Australian English, in most environments, the voiced stop set
/b, d, g/is usually realised with short-lag VOT (phonetically
like[p, t, k]), and the voiceless stops/p, t, k/with long-lag
VOT (phonetically like[p h, th, kh]).
1.2. Factors affecting VOT
VOT shows variation linked to several linguistic and social fac-
tors. Cross-linguistically, VOT tends to increase as the place of
**indicates the corresponding author.
articulation moves further back in the mouth [5], manifesting
in English as the bilabial stops/p, b/having the shortest VOT,
then alveolar/t, d/, then velar/k, g/, e.g. [3]. Speech rate
also affects VOT, with stops in slower speech having longer
VOT than those in faster speech [6], and potential differences
between read and spontaneous speech, e.g. [7]. The phonetic
environment plays a role too, with stops before close vowels
tending to have longer VOT than those before mid and open
vowels, e.g. [7, 8]. In terms of social variation, studies of many
languages including English have observed variation based on
gender, with women tending to have longer VOT than men,
particularly for voiceless stops e.g. [9], although the inverse
has been observed in e.g. Mandarin [10]. Gendered patterns
of VOT in Australian English are acquired from early child-
hood [11]. VOT can also be used to index ethnic/cultural back-
ground, for example with Lebanese Australians having shorter
VOT for voiced and voiceless alveolar stops than Anglo-Celtic
Australians [12]. All of these factors contribute to the measure-
ment of stop releases being important for capturing between-
and within-speaker variation in speech.
1.3. Additional dimensions of stop releases
Recent work on Australian English has observed periods of
breathy voicing as part of the release phase of stops, particu-
larly after the phonemically voiceless stops/p, t, k/[13]. These
do not appear to have been previously reported for Australian
English or other English varieties, though ‘pre-aspiration’, in
which the transition from a vowel into a following consonant
includes a period of voicelessness and often breathiness, has
been found (e.g. [14] for Australian English). In addition,
for coda consonants, glottalisation has emerged as a phonation-
based cue to voicing in Australian English [15].
Post-stop breathiness has been observed in other languages
such as Bengali [16], where breathiness in stop releases has re-
ceived more attention due to its contributions to a four-way con-
trast in stop series. In Bengali, as in many other Indo-Aryan lan-
guages [17], breathy voiced stops such as/b H/, with a breathy
release phase, contrast with voiced stops such as/b/, voice-
less unaspirated stops such as/p/, and voiceless aspirated stops
such as/p h/. However, in addition to being present for breathy
voiced stops, periods of breathy voicing have also been ob-
served in the release of Bengali voiceless aspirated stops, during
the transition into the voicing of the vowel [16].
The presence of a similar phenomenon in Australian En-
glish shows that there is more variation in the release of English
stops than can be captured through a one-dimensional measure
such as VOT, and raises the question of how to best approach
this.
1764
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1555
2. Research aims
The research aims are to find the most appropriate criteria for
identifying and segmenting periods of breathiness in stop re-
leases, and examine the durational properties of the breathy
phases as a component of the stop release.
3. Method
3.1. Materials
The data used in this study was taken from a larger wordlist in
the Talking About Tasmania corpus, which is designed to target
a range of variables that exhibit sociophonetic variation in Aus-
tralian English, coupled with spontaneous interview data. The
data was collected using a RØDE NT3 cardioid microphone,
and a Zoom H6 recorder, at 24-bit 96 kHz, in a range of quiet
mostly non-studio indoor locations. There are 9 items from the
wordlist included: 3 for each of the voiceless stop phonemes
described in Australian English. The initial stop is followed by
the vowel/æ/in each item. For each stop phoneme, two of the
target items are monosyllabic /CæC/ (the final consonant also
being a stop), with the other containing the stop of interest as
the onset of a stressed first syllable in a disyllabic word. The
target items are listed in Table 1.
Table 1:Target wordlist items with phonemic transcriptions
/p/ /t/ /k/
pack/pæk/ tab/tæb/ cap/kæp/
pad/pæd/ tack/tæk/ cat/kæt/
paddle/pæd@l/ tackle/tæk@l/ cattle/kæt@l/
The wordlist items were presented in a randomised order, in
the frame ”say another XXX again”, an environment that con-
sistently has a schwa on each side of the target item. The target
words were elicited 5 times per speaker. The corpus contains 37
Tasmanian speakers of Australian English, of different genders
and split into two age groups. More detailed information about
the demographic profile of the sample of speakers can be found
in Table 2.
Some problems with particular tokens warranted their ex-
clusion from the dataset. These include an incorrect environ-
ment due to a mistake in the frame, a completely fricated stop
with no meaningful start point for a release phase, a completely
devoiced vowel with no meaningful end point for a release
phase, or excessive background noise. After 31 exclusions,
there are a total of 1,638 tokens included in this analysis. Their
distribution is outlined by speaker demographic cohort in Table
2 and by phone in Table 3.
Table 2:Speakers and tokens by age group and gender
Younger (18-35) Older (50-70) Total
Female 11 (488) 11 (489) 22 (977)
Male 5 (218) 8 (357) 13 (575)
Other genders 2 (86) 2 (86)
Total 18 (792) 19 (846) 37 (1,638)
Table 3:Token numbers by phone
/p/ /t/ /k/ Total
542 553 543 1,638
3.2. Processing and segmentation
The .wav audio files for each token in its frame were downsam-
pled to 16-bit depth and 44.1 kHz sample rate. An associated
Praat [18] .TextGrid file was created for each token, containing
automatic word- and phone-level aligned transcriptions. These
alignments were performed using the Montreal Forced Aligner
(MFA) English acoustic model v.3.1.0 [19], and a custom word
to phone dictionary tailored to the contents of the wordlist and
designed to approximate Australian English transcription con-
ventions within the constraints of the acoustic model.
The segmentation of the release phase was also conducted
in Praat. While V oice Onset Time has served well in describing
the phonetic realisation of the stop contrast in Australian En-
glish and some associated sociolinguistic patterning, it was im-
pressionistically clear from the outset of data exploration that
periods of breathy voicing were present after these voiceless
stops, so another tier was added for this information.
As can be seen in Figures 1 and 2, the first tier contains
information about the total V oice Onset Time of the stop. In
the case of positive VOT, this started at the beginning of the
burst accompanying the release of the stop and continued until
the voicing in the vowel is achieved. No incidences of negative
VOT were observed in this sample of voiceless stops.
The second tier contains more fine-grained information
about the shifts in phonation over the release phase of the stop.
After every release burst, there was a phase of aperiodic noise
with no strong pattern on the spectrogram. This was marked
as the aspiration phase, similar to After Closure Time (ACT)
used by Mikuteit & Reetz [16]. Some tokens had a period of
breathy voicing between the voiceless aspiration and the vowel,
and was marked as such. This is similar to what is described
as Superimposed Aspiration (SA) by Mikuteit & Reetz [16].
It is characterised by periodicity in the waveform with a visible
voicing bar on the spectrogram, yet frication visible on both and
an auditorily breathy quality. The beginning of this phase was
placed at the top of the first breathy voiced cycle in the wave-
form. This segment was included as part of the broader VOT, as
it is part of the stop release’s transition into the vowel. An ex-
ample segmentation of a stop release which includes a breathy
phase is shown in Figure 1. In some cases, the conditions for
breathy voicing were met, but for only one cycle. Anything
shorter than two cycles (around 8-15ms depending on speaker)
was considered too short to establish a pattern of breathiness.
After the release phase, most tokens moved to modal voic-
ing for the vowel. As per Gregory’s [20] flowchart for voice
quality classification in Australian English, a clear and regular
harmonic structure (normal formants visible in the spectrogram)
and a lack of frication on the waveform were used to mark this
transition. The end of the VOT and the beginning of the vowel
was placed at the top of the first modally voiced cycle in the
waveform. There were some instances of creaky voiced vow-
els, where the glottal pulses were widely spaced with relative
silence in between. When this happened, the boundary was
placed at the peak of the first glottal pulse. An example seg-
mentation of a stop release that goes from voiceless aspiration
straight to the modal voicing of the vowel is shown in Figure 2.
1765
k æ
vot_p
asp breath
Time (s)
0.6244 0.7403
0.637736133 0.693408737
k æ
vot_p
asp breath
Time (s)
0.6244 0.7403
0.6934087370.722898781
Figure 1:An example of a stop release moving from voiceless
aspiration, to breathy voicing, to modal voicing.
k æ
vot_p
asp
Time (s)
0.6558 0.7795
0.669816187 0.766108791
Figure 2:An example of a stop release with a clear transition
from voiceless aspiration to modal voicing.
There were some tokens where the vowel remained breathy
throughout. In these cases, the breathy phase was excluded from
the VOT measurement and treated as the vowel. These phases
were not measured for duration.
3.3. Statistical analysis
After segmentation was complete, the textgrids were imported
into a database using EMU-SDMS [21], a package for R [22].
The (generalised-) linear mixed effects models were run using
the lme4 package [23].
4. Results
4.1. Frequency of breathiness in the release phase
Before turning to the durational properties, here we summarise
the overall prevalence of breathy phases in this sample. Breathy
phases appear in about 42% of the tokens. Breathiness occurs
frequently across the different places of articulation, with the
highest frequency for bilabial and alveolar, with velar having a
somewhat lower rate. Details of the frequency and proportions
by phone can be found in Table 4.
The proportion of stop releases that contained phases of
breathiness varied between speakers, with noticeable patterns
Table 4:Proportion of release phases with breathy segments by
phone
/p/ /t/ /k/ Total
238/542 242/553 209/543 689/1,638
(44%) (44%) (38%) (42%)
between different demographic groups. Female speakers’ to-
kens contained breathiness over half of the time, compared to
less than a quarter for male speakers, with speakers of other
genders in between. Older female speakers had a higher rate
of breathy phases than younger female speakers, but this age
difference was not present in the sample of male speakers. De-
tails of the frequency and proportions by speaker cohort can be
found in Table 5.
Table 5:Proportion of release phases with breathy segments by
speaker cohort
Younger Older Total
Female 231/488 304/489 535/977
(47%) (62%) (55%)
Male 46/218 74/357 120/575
(21%) (21%) (21%)
Other genders 34/86 34/86
(40%) (40%)
Total 311/792 378/846 689/1,638
(39%) (45%) (42%)
A binomial generalised linear mixed effects model was run
with the presence of a breathy phase as the dependent variable.
Gender, age group, place of articulation and number of syllables
in the target word were included as independent variables, and
the speaker and the specific target word included as random ef-
fects. In terms of social patterns in between-speaker variation,
gender was significant (p <0.001), with breathy phases oc-
curring less frequently for male speakers. In terms of linguistic
patterns in within-speaker variation, place of articulation was
significant (p= 0.04), with breathy phases occurring less fre-
quently in the releases of velar stops. No significant interactions
were found between any of the factors.
4.2. Durational properties of release phase segments
Looking at the duration values for only the aspiration part of the
release phase (not including any breathy phases) as reported in
Table 6, the different places of articulation follow the expected
pattern, with velar (84.0 ms) being slightly longer than alve-
olar (82.4 ms), and bilabial (73.8 ms) being the shortest. The
mean breathy phase, including zero values, was longer for bil-
abial (8.6 ms) and alveolar (8.5 ms) than velar (6.7 ms). Adding
these together for a combined VOT measurement, alveolar
(90.8 ms) catches up to velar (90.6 ms), with bilabial (82.4 ms)
still shorter. Though small, these changes can be observed in the
distribution of aspiration phase durations in Figure 4, compared
with the combined VOT in Figure 5.
To compare the effects of considering the release phase
with or without the breathy phases included, linear mixed ef-
fects models were run with the duration of the aspiration phase
and the combined VOT duration the as the dependent variables
respectively, with the same independent and random effects as
1766
Table 6:Mean duration of stop release phases by phone
/p/ /t/ /k/
Aspiration only 73.8 ms 82.4 ms 84.0 ms
Breathy only 8.6 ms 8.5 ms 6.7 ms
Combined VOT 82.4 ms 90.8 ms 90.6 ms
0
50
100
150
200
0 20 40 60
Breathy phase duration (ms)
Count
Figure 3:Distribution of breathy phase durations.
the chance of breathy phase model. Although a place of articu-
lation effect for bilabial stops having a shorter aspiration phase
was marginal in both the aspiration only model (p= 0.08, esti-
mate −8.7 ms) and the overall VOT model (p= 0.10, estimate
−8.4 ms), none of the independent factors in the model reached
significance.
The overall range in the breathy phases observed was from
6.5 ms to 72.0 ms (recalling that as mentioned in Section 3.2,
breathy phases were identified based on a minimum of two cy-
cles on the waveform). As shown in Figure 3, the vast majority
of these breathy phases lie between roughly 8 ms and 30 ms,
however there are 100 tokens longer than this, many of which
are much longer.
5. Discussion and conclusion
This paper has confirmed impressions that post-stop breathiness
is highly prevalent after voiceless stops in this corpus of Aus-
tralian English data, occurring in almost half of the data. There
are significant differences in the prevalence on the basis of gen-
der, with male speakers exhibiting breathiness less frequently.
There are also significant differences in relation to place of ar-
ticulation, with breathiness occurring less frequently after velar
/k/than other stops. Given that post-stop breathiness does not
appear to have been reported in the literature for Australian En-
glish or other English varieties, the reported findings raise the
question of whether a similar phenomenon can be observed in
other corpora of (Australian) English data.
The method presented here offers a reference point to fa-
cilitate further exploration of this phenomenon in English vari-
eties. Drawing on approaches from typologically different lan-
guages exhibiting similar phenomena [16] and heuristics for de-
termining suprasegmental voice quality in Australian English
[11], breathy voicing in the release phase can be examined as
an additional dimension of variation in English onset stops.
There is a wide durational range in the identified breathy
phases. Most are concentrated around the range of 8 ms to
0
50
100
150
200
/p/ /t/ /k/
Phone
Aspiration phase duration (ms)
Figure 4:Distribution of aspiration phase duration by phone.
0
50
100
150
200
/p/ /t/ /k/
Phone
Aspiration phase duration (ms)
Figure 5:Distribution of combined VOT duration by phone.
30 ms, but quite a few tokens are considerably longer, as evi-
dent in Figure 3. Although duration differences relating to place
of articulation are not significant in the models, the mean dura-
tion of alveolar stop releases becomes equivalent to that of the
velar stops when the breathy phases are included as part of the
VOT. In general, while the aggregated impacts of considering
the breathy phases are small, the results show that their inclu-
sion or exclusion can still influence observed linguistic effects
such as place of articulation and social effects such as gender.
The uneven distribution of breathy phases across linguistic
and social factors highlight the relevance of employing a consis-
tent methodology across work to effectively capture between-
and within-speaker variation in stop realisation. Impression-
istic exploration of the broader corpus, including spontaneous
speech, does not show a link between frequency of phases of
breathiness in stop release and overall speaker-specific voice
quality. This suggests that the observed breathiness is a phe-
nomenon tied to the realisation of onset stops, rather than an
artefact of more general differences in vocal tract setting. Given
that patterns based on gender and place of articulation have been
observed in previous analyses of onset stops Australian English,
e.g. [11], breathy phases may form a distinct but related part of
established patterns of variation. The present study shows post-
stop breathiness is another dimension of variation that should
be investigated in sociolinguistic studies of English stops.
1767
6. Acknowledgements
This research was made possible by funding from the Aus-
tralian Government Research Training Program and HDR fund-
ing from the School of Literature, Language and Linguistics at
the Australian National University. We would like to thank ev-
eryone who gave comments and advice at the 2025 Forum on
Englishes in Australia and the 2025 Conference of the Aus-
tralian Linguistic Society. We would also like to thank all
the participants and everyone who assisted in recruitment and
helped to organise locations for interviews.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
No generative AI tools were used in the writing or editing of the
paper.