Automatic identification of the onset of creaky voice according to F0 instability
Rasmus Puggaard-Rode ID 1,∗,∗∗, Joshua Penney ID 2,∗
1 Faculty of Linguistics, Philology and Phonetics, University of Oxford, UK
2 Department of Linguistics, Macquarie University
rasmus.puggaard-rode@ling-phil.ox.ac.uk, joshua.penney@mq.edu.au
Abstract
Creaky voice serves a number of linguistic and extra-linguistic
functions and is a commonly studied feature in phonet-
ics. While methods are available for automatically evaluating
whether creak is present within a window of speech, researchers
who wish to identify transitions between creaky and modal por-
tions of speech, and their precise temporal patterning, usually
rely on manual annotation. In this paper, we propose a method
for automatically identifying the onset of creak based on F0 in-
stability, building on the common observation that creak is often
accompanied by octave shifts. We evaluate the method by com-
paring automatically estimated with human-annotated creak on-
set from a previous study on creak as a cue to the coda voicing
contrast in Australian English. The automatic method performs
similarly to human annotators, and we show that our proposed
automatic method and manual annotation yield similar results
for the questions posed in the previous study.
Index Terms: Creaky voice, glottalization, voice quality, anno-
tation, automatic identification, F0
1. Introduction
In this paper, we suggest a method for automatically identifying
the onset of creak in syllables with transitions from modal voice
to creaky voice, a task which is typically accomplished with
manual annotation. Our method takes advantage of the obser-
vation that these transitions often incur major jumps in the out-
put of F0 tracking algorithms – often a nuisance for researchers
interested in pitch [1] – and rely on jumps to predict the onset
of creak. This method is intended to supplement existing meth-
ods for predicting the presence or absence of creak in a window
of speech [2] as a further step towards reducing the reliance on
manual annotation in the linguistic analysis of creaky voice.
The rest of this section gives a brief overview of the various
linguistic functions of creak, and discusses existing methods for
automatically identifying creak. Section 2 describes the imple-
mentation of our proposed method, and introduces the data and
methods we use for validation. In Section 3 we compare the per-
formance of the method against manually annotated data from
a previous study [3], and test whether using manual and auto-
matic annotation arrive at functionally similar results in a lin-
guistic phonetic study. In Section 4, we briefly discuss some of
the advantages of our method, as well as areas for improvement.
1.1. Creaky voice
Creaky voice is a non-modal phonation type that is generally
characterized by low and often irregular fundamental frequency
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
(F0), increased glottal constriction, and damping of individual
glottal pulses [4, 5, 6]. There are a number of acoustic sub-types
of creak [7]. Although low F0 is not a necessary cue for per-
ceiving phonation as creaky [5, 7], low F0 is a common acous-
tic feature of most sub-types of creak, and as [6] notes, low F0
tends to be “one of the most salient acoustic cues distinguishing
creaky from modal phonation” [p. e23].
Creaky voice serves a number of functions across many
different languages (see [6] for a review). In some languages
it is phonemic, contrasting with other phonation types such as
modal or breathy voice [8]. In register languages, phonation
type (including creaky voice) may be combined with pitch and
potentially other cues to signal a phonemic contrast [6, 8, 9, 10].
Creak also occurs allophonically for certain contrasts in some
tonal languages, particularly when there is a low pitch tar-
get [11, 12, 13]. Another common function of creaky voice
is the delineation of prosodic structure, in particular at the end
of intonational phrases or utterances, where it may indicate fi-
nality and facilitate turn-taking, as observed in a range of lan-
guages [14, 15, 16, 17]. This prosodic function of creaky voice
has attracted much academic and popular interest, particularly
in the English-speaking world, where the extent to which creaky
voice is used is often linked to social categories, especially gen-
der [15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. In many languages, including
English, creak may co-occur with a particular segment, in what
is sometimes referred to as segmental creak [6, 23, 24]. In lan-
guages with phonemic glottal stops, the /P/ phoneme may be
phonetically realized by creaky voice, either with or without
a complete glottal stop [25, 26, 27]. Similarly, in languages
which use glottal stop insertion as a hiatus resolution strategy,
glottal stops may also be realized as a brief period of creaky
voice [28, 29, 30]. V owel-initial words are often realized with
initial creaky voice and/or glottal stops, particularly under in-
creased prominence and at phrase onsets [17, 31, 32].
Finally, in many varieties of English, syllable-final /t/-
glottalization results in a brief portion of creaky voice on the
vowel preceding the stop, which may in some cases be unre-
leased or realized with a lenited oral gesture [33, 34, 35, 36]. In
general, segmental creak can be quite brief, and is often shorter
than other functions of creak that may unfold over a syllable or
a prosodic phrase. In this paper, we focus on the co-occurrence
of segmental creak and /t/-glottalization in Australian English.
1.2. Automatic identification of creak
Manual human annotation of creaky voice is time-consuming
and resource-intensive, and can be subjective and prone to per-
ceptual biases. In recent years, a number of methods for the
automatic identification of creaky voice have been developed,
including an F0-based method [22, 37], algorithms based on a
1833
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1430
number of acoustic features [38, 39], and combinations of such
tools [2, 40]. Such methods apply consistent criteria across
speech data and enable rapid processing of large amounts of
data, facilitating larger-scale analyses of speech beyond what is
generally possible using solely human annotation.
Generally, such automatic identification methods provide
an indication of whether creak is likely to be present or not
within a specified window. These tools have obvious utility
in identifying creaky portions of speech, enabling examina-
tion of differences in rates of creak prevalence among different
groups of speakers, or for excluding creaky speech from analy-
ses (e.g. for analyses of pitch variation which would potentially
be skewed by the low F0 in creak). However, they are far from
perfect, and still require manual inspection and evaluation [2].
These automatic methods often fail to capture short periods of
creaky voice, or edge cases where there is a change from modal
to creaky voice. This is especially relevant in the case of seg-
mental creak where, as mentioned above, instances of creak are
often brief. Moreover, in some studies, particularly in studies
on segmental creak, fine-grained precision may be required. For
example, researchers may be interested in identifying at exactly
which point in the speech signal there is a change from modal
voicing to creak, in order measure the duration of creaky por-
tions within a vowel or syllable [3, 17, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46].
Prior to the method presented in this paper, we are not aware
of any tools aimed at automatically identifying the location of
modal–creak transitions in the signal, and this is a task that can-
not be performed well (if at all) by existing methods aimed at
identifying whether windows of speech contain creaky voice.
In this paper, we introduce a method for identifying such
modal–creak transitions based on instability in the F0 contour.
Major instabilities in F0 contours, such as octave shifts, are of-
ten attributed to algorithmic tracking error, and some methods
for tracking F0 penalize octave shifts by default [47]. However,
as pointed out by [48], some such octave shifts are in fact ‘real’,
in the sense that they reflect doubling or halving of the rate of
vocal fold vibration between pulses. Building on this obser-
vation, [49, 50] propose and test using F0 ratio as a method
of classifying phonological contrasts that may rely on intra-
syllabic voice quality transitions,viz. the fortis/aspirated con-
trast in Seoul Korean stops [51] and the stød contrast in Dan-
ish [52, 53]. The insight of the F0 ratio method is that phono-
logical creaky voice often involves octave shifts, which can be
captured by estimating the ratio of F0 in the first and last third
of a vowel, since this ratio should be highly affected by intra-
syllabic octave shifts. Inspired by this insight, the method we
propose in this paper relies on taking the precise time point of
octave shifts or other major pitch instabilities as a proxy for the
onset of creaky voice.
2. Methods
2.1. Speakers
The speech data examined here were produced by 36 speakers
aged between 18 and 35 years (17 female, 19 male). All were
native speakers of Australian English (AusE) who had grown
up in the Sydney, New South Wales region, and had completed
all of their schooling in Australia.
2.2. Speech data
The data included in this analysis are taken from the AusTalk
corpus [54], a large-scale collection of AusE speech designed
to capture (socio-)phonetic variation. AusTalk comprises high-
quality audio recordings collected under both controlled and
semi-controlled conditions from speakers across multiple re-
gions, age groups, and social backgrounds. Full details of the
corpus and data collection procedures are available in [54, 55].
A subset of data from AusTalk were originally analysed
in [3], comprising monosyllabic words with the form /hVt/ and
/hVd/, where V represents one of the vowels /i:,I, o:,O,5:,5,
0:/. These were produced as single words in isolation, elicited
as part of a controlled reading task. [3] examined 2,427 items
from 67 speakers for the presence of glottalization, operational-
ized as a short period of creaky voice in the vowel preceding
the coda stop. The results demonstrated that glottalization (i.e.
creak) occurred primarily before voiceless coda stops, but rarely
before voiced coda stops, thus serving as a cue to coda stop
voicelessness. Glottalization was additionally found to be more
frequent in the speech of the younger age group, suggesting an
apparent time change in the use of glottalization as a cue to the
coda stop voicing contrast in AusE. Full methodological details
and results can be found in [3].
The subset of data included in the current analysis con-
sists of all /hVt/ items produced by speakers in the younger
age group that were identified as containing glottalization
(i.e. creaky voice) in [3]. This comprises 474 items.
2.3. Automatic identification of creak onset
As noted above, all items included in the analysis were pre-
viously identified as containing creaky voice, and the onset of
creak had been manually identified for the previous study. Hu-
man annotators identified the onset of creak as the point where a
sudden reduction of the glottal cycle period became visible and
was paired with amplitude irregularity, based on inspection of
the waveform and spectrogram. Here, we propose a method for
automatically identifying the onset of creak.
We use the REAPER (Robust Epoch And Pitch Estima-
toR) software [56] for F0 estimation. REAPER uses an
autocorrelation-based algorithm wrapped in a dynamic pro-
gramming procedure to estimate the locations of glottal closure
instants (GCIs), and calculates F0 from the distance between
GCIs. This is different from the autocorrelation-based algo-
rithm implemented in Praat [47, 57], which estimates instan-
taneous F0 from each frame based on that frame’s autocorre-
lation peak, i.e. without explicit reference to the locations of
GCIs. Praat penalizes octave shifts by default, although this
can be suppressed [47, 49]. REAPER crucially does not pe-
nalize octave shifts, and has previously been shown to perform
particularly well for pathological and non-modal speech [2, 58].
Our automatic method involves tracking F0 and estimating
the locations of GCIs in relevant syllables using the default set-
tings in REAPER, i.e. F0 floor and ceiling values of 40 and 500
Hz respectively, and 5 ms window shift. We also estimate root-
mean-squared (RMS) amplitude using Praat (with the default 32
ms window length and 8 ms window shift), and limit the search
window for creak onset to after the RMS amplitude peak. This
is done to discard F0 instabilities shortly after the vowel onset
from consideration. Such instabilities are relatively common in
our data, likely caused by the onset /h/. F0 instability is opera-
tionalized by calculating the derivative of the estimated F0 time
series at a time lag of one frame. We find the first F0 frame with
an associated F0 derivative at≥80%of the peak derivative,
since the peak derivative itself often occurs during the creaky
phase but somewhat after the onset of creaky voice. The on-
set of creaky voice is then automatically determined as the GCI
closest to this F0 frame.
1834
Figure 1:Example diagnostic plot, showing F0 derivative over
time (top) and waveform with REAPER-predicted GCIs (bot-
tom), indicating automatic (blue) and human-labelled (red)
creak onset.
Figure 2:Example diagnostic plot (see description of Figure 1).
This method is implemented as a function in R [59], which
can be used either for analyzing a single audio file or for bulk
analyzing all files in a directory. The analysis can either be ap-
plied to a search window based on existing annotation (in the
Praat TextGrid format) or applied to an entire audio file, and the
function optionally compares the results with existing manual
annotation. The function returns results as an R data object, and
optionally generates new TextGrids with the predicted onset of
creaky voice (using therPraatlibrary [60]) as well as diag-
nostic plots showing the results of the analysis. Figures 1 and 2
show examples of such diagnostic plots, where the automatic
method and human annotator arrive at effectively identical re-
sults (Figure 1), and where the creak onset is placed approxi-
mately two pulses apart (Figure 2) but neither annotation is ob-
viously superior to the other. The R function can be downloaded
from OSF (DOI: 10.17605/OSF.IO/C8627).
2.4. Comparison between manual and automatic methods
In order to compare the results of manual and automatic iden-
tification of creak onset, we compare two phonetically relevant
Figure 3:Violin plots showing the distribution of creak dura-
tions based on the automatic method and human annotations.
measures that rely on this annotation: creak duration (calculated
from the onset of creaky voice to the end of the vowel segment),
and glottalization–vowel ratio (G/V ratio), which captures the
proportion of creaky voice in the vowel. In addition to a vi-
sual comparison of creak durations, we assess the agreement
between the two methods with a two-way, single-measure intr-
aclass correlation coefficient (ICC) using theirrlibrary [61].
One of the main findings of [3] was that creak occupied
a greater proportion of short vowels than long vowels, i.e. the
G/V ratio was lower. To compare the effects of identification
method on the result of a real phonetic analysis, we use a com-
parable modeling strategy for the present subset of data, ap-
plying the same model structure and predictors (excluding age
group, as only data from the young speaker group is analyzed
here). Two linear mixed-effects models were fitted using the
lme4library [62], where the dependent variable is G/V ratio
based on human annotators and the automatic method, respec-
tively.genderandvowelwere included as fixed factors with an
interaction term, and random by-speaker intercepts were mod-
eled. We assessed overall significance with a type-III ANOV A.
Pairwise comparisons were conducted with theemmeansli-
brary [63]. Derived data, additional plots, and analysis code is
available from OSF (DOI: 10.17605/OSF.IO/C8627).
3. Results
3.1. Performance
The automatic method in general performs similarly to human
annotators, though we observe some differences between meth-
ods. Figure 3 compares creak durations according to identifi-
cation method. Both methods result in broadly similar distribu-
tions: the majority of observations are clustered between 25–75
ms, and there is a range of variable observations at higher dura-
tions. There appears to be a tendency for the automatic method
to result in somewhat longer durations, particularly at the top
end of the scale. There is also a clear outlier token produced by
the automatic method, which has a duration below 0 ms. This
is clearly an error and will be discarded from further analysis.
(The error occurs because this token contains residual periodic-
ity after the end of the vowel; we return to this in Section 4.)
3.2. Correlation between human and automatic method
Figure 4 illustrates the relationship between creak durations ob-
tained through the two methods. The scatterplot reveals a strong
1835
Figure 4:Correlation between creak durations (in ms) derived
from human and automatic annotation.
positive linear association, with the fitted regression line indi-
cating that longer durations as identified by the human anno-
tator correspond to longer durations as identified by the auto-
matic method. While the methods are strongly aligned, they are
not identical, particularly for tokens with higher durations, as
shown by the dispersion around the regression line.
The intraclass correlation analysis (see Section 2.4) indi-
cated good agreement between the two methods (ICC = .768,
95% CI [.712, .813]) with significantly greater than zero relia-
bility (F(472,175) = 8.12,p < .001). Although this level of
agreement is generally considered to be good, we note that it is
below what is often considered excellent inter-rater agreement
(.90+) [64]. Overall, the results suggest substantial though not
perfect agreement between the two annotation methods.
3.3. Modelling glottalization ratio
In both models of G/V ratio (see Section 2.4), there was a signif-
icant overall effect ofvowel(auto:χ 2(6) = 97.6,p < .0001;
human:χ 2(6) = 70.8,p < .0001).Genderwas not signif-
icant, nor was the interaction betweengenderandvowel. In
both models, the same patterns of significant differences were
found, with all short vowels (/I,O,5/) differing significantly
from all long vowels (/i:, o:,5:,0:/), but no significant differ-
ences within the short or long vowel pairs. There was one ex-
ception to this: in the model based on the automatic method,
there was a significant difference between the two short vow-
els /I/ and /5/ (p= 0.046). Although this comparison did not
approach significance in the other model, we note that the direc-
tion of the predicted effect is the same in both models. Figure 5
illustrates the model predicted G/V ratios according to onset
identification method and vowel label. Individual data points
represent raw G/V ratio values.
4. Discussion
We have presented a method for automatically identifying
modal–creak transitions, and evaluated the method against a
manually annotated corpus. In this section, we will discuss the
pros and cons of different approaches to determining creak on-
set, and present some possible avenues for improvement.
The automatic method we propose generally yields func-
tionally similar results to manual annotation. We note, however,
a systematic tendency for the automatic method to place the on-
set of creak earlier than human annotators, which may be why
Figure 5:Model-predicted G/V ratios by vowel based on the
automatic method and human annotations.
the ‘inter-rater’ agreement is good rather than excellent. In par-
ticular, the automatic method often places the onset of creak one
or two pulses earlier. From inspecting diagnostic plots (such as
those in Figure 2), it is not obviously the case that the man-
ual annotation is abetterrepresentation of the actual onset of
creak. In some cases, the automatic method may in fact yield
better results. In any case, there are clear advantages to auto-
matic annotation over manual annotation: manual annotation is
very resource-intensive, and automatic annotation ensures that
consistent criteria are applied across tokens.
Our approach relies on well-understood signal processing
algorithms. An obvious alternative would be to train a neu-
ral network on manually annotated data, as has been done
for general-purpose forced alignment [65] and for specific-
purpose annotation tasks such as finding voice onset time land-
marks [66]. While there are undoubtedly advantages to these
approaches, we also see advantages to our approach. Relying on
core signal processing is highly efficient, since the underlying
algorithms are fast. The code is fairly simple, so it is straightfor-
ward to tweak, and when it fails, it is usually straightforward to
determine what went wrong. Furthermore, as we hinted above,
manual annotation may not always be the ‘gold standard’.
A limitation is that we have only tested the method on one
phonological source of creak; it remains to be seen how well the
method generalizes to other sources of creak that may be imple-
mented differently. The method currently searches for creak on-
set, i.e. shifts from modal to creaky voice. We expect it can be
extended to creak offset, i.e. shifts from creaky to modal voice
(e.g. word-initial or hiatus contexts) simply by scanning the F0
track for irregularities from right-to-left rather than left-to-right.
In the present dataset, only one obvious substantial outlier
had to be discarded due to residual periodicity after the vowel
itself. We imagine issues like these can be fixed by e.g. limit-
ing the search window based on RMS amplitude. The method
currently limits the search window toafterthe syllable’s RMS
amplitude peak (as discussed in Section 2.3), which works well
(and is a necessary adjustment) in the Australian English case,
but may not be suitable for other research questions. In fu-
ture iterations of the code, any RMS amplitude-based delimi-
tation of the search window can be made more flexible to suit
the user’s needs. In its current form, this method already pro-
vides an effective means for consistent automated annotation of
modal–creak transitions, which we anticipate will be of inter-
est to researchers working on fine-grained temporal analyses of
non-modal speech.
1836
5. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were not used in the writing or editing of
this paper.