Variation and change in dynamicity of Australian English diphthongs in Sydney 
Benjamin Purser1 
1School of Literature, Languages, and Linguistics, Australian National University, Australia 
benjamin.purser@anu.edu.au 
 
Abstract 
Diphthongs are established loci of variation and change in 
Australian English, yet have been analysed predominantly 
using static vowel measures. More recent research exploring 
dynamicity of these vowels indicates a degree of variation and 
change over time in their dynamic properties, however this 
prior work has generally considered F1 and F2 separately. This 
paper examines dynamicity of F1 and F2 simultaneously using 
multivariate functional principal component analysis 
(MFPCA), analysing more than 57,000 tokens of six 
diphthongs (FACE, FLEECE, GOAT, NEAR, MOUTH, and PRICE) 
from a corpus of spontaneous speech, and considering both 
linguistic and social conditioning (according to age, gender, and 
social class). Overall patterns of social variation align with prior 
research about the expected direction of change for each vowel, 
yet considering F1 and F2 in tandem provides a more holistic 
understanding of the dynamic properties of these diphthongs. 
Index Terms: dynamic vowel analysis, multivariate functional 
principal component analysis, Australian English, diphthongs 
1. Introduction 
Diphthongs have long been established as loci of variation and 
change in Australian English (AusE), and prior acoustic studies 
exploring these diphthongs have predominantly relied on static 
vowel measures, including single-point (e.g., 20%, 80% points) 
and target-based approaches [e.g., 1-10]. There is, however, 
increasing recognition of the dynamicity of diphthongs and the 
need to “capture the degree and timing of spectral change as the 
vowel unfolds” in acoustic analysis [11, p.18]. Dynamic 
information has been found to be important for identifying 
diphthong contrasts and for distinguishing tense/lax 
monophthong pairs in AusE [12], and certain vowels (e.g., 
FLEECE, NEAR) are considered variably diphthongal in AusE due 
to variation in dynamicity according to linguistic environment 
and region [e.g., 6, 8, 13, 14]. Indeed, several vowel categories 
have shown change over time in the shape of the vowel 
trajectory itself [7, 11, 14]. 
Furthermore, there is growing evidence that suggests 
dynamic changes across the trajectory “may be harnessed 
socio-indexically” [15, p.120]. Studies examining social 
variation of vowel dynamicity in AusE have generally focused 
on speakers from Sydney, with reported evidence of variation 
in formant trajectories according to social factors such as 
gender and region [13], high school type [14], and community 
diversity [16]. Coupled with prior work using static measures, 
research evidence overall suggests there has been a reduction 
over time in diphthong differences according to social class [4, 
14], but that gender differences persist, with women ahead of 
men in the direction of change [4, 5]. Prior studies have broadly 
found that, over time, FACE and FLEECE are raising and fronting, 
GOAT is raising and backing, NEAR is lowering with increasing 
offglide, MOUTH is lowering and backing, and PRICE is lowering 
and fronting; collectively, these changes are seen to represent a 
move away from male, working-class variants [4, 7, 11, 14, 16]. 
Nonetheless, the increasing focus on vowel dynamicity has 
not necessarily translated into consensus on methods of analysis 
of dynamic properties [17]. Several approaches are found in the 
AusE literature, including discrete cosine transform (DCT) [12, 
13, 18, 19] and generalised additive mixed-models (GAMMs) 
[11, 19], which have been used to effectively capture vowel 
dynamicity of both monophthongs and diphthongs. However, a 
key limitation of this prior work is that DCT and GAMMs are 
typically applied to F1 and F2 separately, contrasting with the 
view that these formants are not independent of one another [see 
20]. Gubian and colleagues argue instead for analysis of 
dynamic change for F1 and F2 in tandem, to ensure “temporal 
dependencies across formants are captured automatically” [21, 
p.24], promoting multivariate functional principal component 
analysis (MFPCA) as a method of doing so. As a dimensionality 
reduction tool, MFPCA has been used to effectively capture 
variation in vowel dynamicity for both acoustic [ 20] and 
articulatory vowel properties [22], and for grouping speakers 
according to their diphthong realisations [23]. Furthermore, by 
considering formants as functions of time, MFPCA is agnostic 
to vowel class, thus allowing the researcher to uniformly model 
both uncontested diphthongs (e.g., FACE, GOAT) and vowels that 
are variably diphthongal in AusE (e.g., FLEECE, NEAR). 
In other varieties, MFPCA has been used to examine vowel 
splits and mergers, highlighting how differences in dynamicity 
can, for example, distinguish speakers at different stages of 
change in the NEAR-SQUARE merger in New Zealand English 
[20], and classify speakers according to geographic variation in 
the British English TRAP-BATH split [24]. Its use in AusE 
research is, however, limited to a single analysis. Sheard 
recently examined real-time lifespan change in FACE for 10 
AusE speakers in Sydney across 40 years, comparing results 
using MFPCA and single-point F1 and F2 measures at vowel 
onset [25]. The static analysis indicated limited change only in 
F2 for some speakers, while MFPCA results captured lifespan 
changes in the shape of the whole vowel trajectory that were 
driven by two explanatory components (one social, one 
linguistic), highlighting the richer insights offered via 
consideration of dynamicity. 
Notably, previous studies of AusE vowel dynamicity in 
spontaneous speech are further limited to single vowels [17, 
25]. Beyond this, no prior analysis has examined dynamicity for 
multiple vowels and for F1 and F2 simultaneously, meaning we 
have limited understanding of the co -occurring dynamic 
properties of both formants across the diphthong set. This paper 
therefore provides a pioneering analysis of six AusE diphthongs 
using a large corpus of spontaneous speech, incorporating 
dynamic vowel data for F1 and F2 in tandem, and exploring 
social and linguistic drivers of variation in dynamicity. 
5627
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3206
2. Method 
2.1. Data & Participants: ANU Corpus of Sydney Speech 
The data analysed here come from sociolinguistic interviews 
for 119 speakers (63 female, 56 male) recorded as part of the 
ANU Corpus of Sydney Speech (2015-Present), the most recent 
of three subcorpora that comprise the Sydney Speaks corpus 
[26, 27]. Approximately 30 minutes of spontaneous speech 
from each speaker was transcribed in ELAN [28], then force-
aligned at the level of the segment using the HTK aligner 
available in the Language, Brain and Behaviour Corpus 
Analysis Tool (LaBB-CAT) [29]. All speakers self-identified 
as female or male, and are divided into two age groups: Adults 
(born mainly in the 1960s, N=58) and Young Adults (born 
mainly in the 1990s, N=61). Speakers are stratified by social 
class as Middle Class (MC), Lower Middle Class (LMC), and 
Working Class (WC), using combined measures of occupation, 
education level, and school type [27, p.170]. Speakers are of 
diverse ethnic backgrounds, but all are native speakers of AusE; 
due to space, however, ethnicity is not explored in this analysis. 
2.2. Data extraction, processing, and normalisation 
F1 and F2 values were extracted at equidistant 10%-90% points 
through the vowel trajectory for tokens of FACE, FLEECE, NEAR, 
GOAT, MOUTH, and PRICE in stressed syllables using the 
FastTrack tool in LaBB-CAT, with lowest and highest formant 
ceilings set at 5000-7000Hz for female speakers, and 4500-
6500Hz for male speakers. Analysis was restricted to 10%-90% 
points to allow for clearer formant tracking in these data which 
were not hand-corrected, providing nine timepoints per formant 
per token. All tokens in grammatical words were excluded 
using a 228-item stopword list. Further filtering removed tokens 
lacking start/end timestamps or speech rate data, tokens with 
transcription errors, tokens with speech rate >10 syllables per 
second, or with duration <20ms or >500ms, as well as tokens 
with F1 midpoints >1200Hz, or with F1 and F2 midpoints more 
than +/-2.5sd from by-speaker, by-vowel means. 
Pre-lateral, pre-approximant (/r, w, j/), and pre -vocalic 
tokens were also excluded, due to retraction effects of lateral 
environments on AusE diphthongs [7], and observed issues in 
the uncorrected data with vowel boundaries adjacent to 
approximants and other vowels. Pre-nasal tokens were retained 
to explore contextual effects more fully. However, tokens 
aligned as pre-nasal NEAR (N=53) were in fact disyllabic 
sequences /iːə/ (e.g., museum, Korean), and were thus excluded. 
Finally, visual inspection of vowel plots indicated some 
persistent anomalous formant values (e.g., low FLEECE F2), 
determined on inspection to be linked to spurious raw Hertz 
measurements at single timepoints in the relevant trajectory that 
were not captured by prior filtering of midpoint  values. 
Subsequently, any tokens with values greater than +/-3.5sd 
from by-vowel, by-gender, by-age group means for each 
timepoint were removed, which was determined necessary to 
reduce the distorting effects of noise on the shape of the vowel 
trajectory, as MFPCA examines the shape of formant curves. 
Ultimately, 57,269 tokens of FACE, FLEECE, NEAR, GOAT, 
MOUTH, and PRICE remained for normalisation (minimum 6 
tokens per vowel per speaker). Table 1 shows the distribution 
of speakers and vowel tokens by age and gender. Raw formant 
values were normalised across the full vowel inventory using 
an adapted Lobanov method [30], to better mitigate bias toward 
vowels with higher token numbers in the calculation of formant 
means due to unbalanced token counts across vowel categories. 
Table 1: Distribution of speakers according to age 
group and gender, with token counts per vowel. 
Age 
group 
Adults 
(b.1957-1973) 
Young Adults 
(b.1985-2001) 
 
Gender Female Male Female Male Total 
Speakers 32 26 31 30 119 
Token counts 
FACE 3,031 3,286 3,178 3,258 12,753 
FLEECE 3,811 3,379 4,208 4,233 15,631 
NEAR 656 653 650 707 2,666 
GOAT 3,853 3,759 3,095 3,036 13,743 
MOUTH 711 703 735 651 2,800 
PRICE 2,237 2,301 2,494 2,644 9,676 
TOTAL 14,299 14,081 14,360 14,529 57,269 
3. Analysis 
3.1. Multivariate functional principal component analysis 
To capture dynamic change of both formants in tandem, 
normalised F1 and F2 values at nine timepoints for each token 
were input into a multivariate functional principal component 
analysis (MFPCA) using the MFPCA package in R [31, 32], 
returning scores for the first five principal components (PCs). 
In essence, this process represents diphthong formants, being 
dynamic features, as continuous functions over a normalised 
timescale, and acts as a “shape -to-numbers converter” by 
parametrising the shape of each formant pair (i.e., each token) 
according to a set of PCs [21, p.19]. These PCs describe multi-
dimensional axes of variation along which the shape of paired 
F1 and F2 formant curves differ in relation to the mean formant 
curve for the data. PC scores for each token indicate the relative 
weighting of the PCs that must be applied to the mean curve in 
order to approximate the input F1 and F2 curves [20, p.297]. 
Here, MFPCA was applied separately to each vowel category. 
From this, the first two PCs explained at least three-quarters of 
the variance in formant values for each vowel (range: 75%-
85%); subsequent analyses focus on these PCs (PC1 and PC2). 
3.2. Identifying relevant linguistic and social predictors 
To determine which factors may be driving variation for each 
PC, a set of mixed-effects models were run using the lme4 
package in R [33], using Satterthwaite approximation for 
degrees of freedom, and with the relevant set of PC scores (PC1 
or PC2) for each diphthong as the dependent variable. Seven 
variables (all deemed important via Boruta feature selection 
algorithm [34] for each PC for each vowel) were included, with 
reference levels listed first for categorical variables: age group 
(Adults, Young Adults), gender (male, female), and social class 
(WC, LMC, MC), and phonological context (pre-obstruent, pre-
nasal, word-final), duration (in milliseconds), speech rate (in 
syllables per second), and word frequency (log-transformed). 
All 12 models (2 sets of PC scores ´ 6 vowels) included this 
uniform set of linguistic and social predictors as fixed effects, 
as well as a two-way interaction for age group and gender, and 
random intercepts for speaker and word. All word types 
occurring only once were pooled as hapax legomena to improve 
the computation of random effects, and because these are 
argued to have minimal individual lexical effect [35]. There is 
increased chance of statistically significant yet trivial effects 
with the large sample sizes for each model; therefore, only input 
variables which show meaningful impacts on PC scores (mainly 
with standardised coefficients (b) greater in magnitude than +/-
5628
0.20) are discussed below (however, full model summaries are 
provided in the online supplementary materials: 
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18794862). Post-hoc analyses 
for phonological context and social class, where noted, use 
Tukey adjusted significance values. 
3.3. Analysing vowel dynamicity: PC scores 
To better understand the relationship between PC scores and 
formant values, the effect of each PC is shown in Figure 1 as 
perturbations of the mean F1 and F2 trajectories (solid lines) 
over normalised time, with perturbated curves obtained by 
adding or subtracting the PC curve multiplied by the standard 
deviation of scores for the relevant PC  to/from the mean 
trajectory [see 20]. Note that mean F1 and F2 trajectories for 
each vowel are identical for PC1 (left panels) and PC2 (right 
panels). Positive and negative perturbations are shown in blue 
(+) and red (–), representing relatively higher and lower PC 
scores, respectively. Examining Figure 1, F1 and F2 should be 
considered together for each PC to understand how quantitative 
differences in PC scores reflect simultaneous dynamic changes. 
The distinct patterns of variation in dynamicity for each vowel 
are explored in Section 4 with reference to linguistic and social 
factors. (An illustration of these perturbations in F1xF2 space 
is available in the online supplementary materials). As noted 
below, at least one PC for each vowel was found to demonstrate 
variation according to age group and gender. To better interpret 
these social effects, mean normalised formant trajectories by 
age group and gender are therefore shown in Figure 2. 
4. Results 
As depicted in Figure 1 (top row, left panels), positive change 
in FACE PC1 indicates overall higher F1 and lower F2 (that is, 
more open and retracted realisations), while negative change in 
scores reflects overall higher and fronter FACE; PC1 therefore 
appears to capture the direction of change for FACE [4]. Indeed, 
both age group (b=-0.93, p<.001) and gender (b=-0.51, p<.001) 
explain this PC, with Young Adults and women showing higher 
and fronter FACE than Adults and men, respectively (Figure 2). 
There is also an effect of phonological context, with pre -
obstruent FACE lower and more retracted than pre-nasal or 
word-final tokens (post-hoc: p<.001). For PC2, positive change 
in scores reflects F1-lowering mainly in the first half of the 
vowel, and F2-lowering in the second half (and vice versa for 
negative tracks), together suggesting more centralised versus 
more peripheral FACE. Context is the primary driver of this (b=-
0.62, p<.001); post-hoc analyses reveal pre-nasal tokens are 
more peripheral than pre-obstruent and word-final tokens 
(p<.001). A duration effect (b=-0.26, p<.001) suggests shorter 
tokens are more centralised. PC2, then, reflects linguistic rather 
than social conditioning for FACE. 
FLEECE PC1 is associated mainly with differences in the 
overall F2 trajectory (Figure 1; top row, right panels): positive 
scores indicate greater retraction, and negative scores greater 
fronting. There is a significant interaction for age group and 
gender (b=-0.42, p<.001), and post-hoc analyses indicate Adult 
men have significantly more retracted FLEECE than all other 
groups (p<.001; Figure 2), who are not differentiated. This 
appears to underlie the individual effects for age group (b=-
0.46, p<.001) and gender (b=-0.31, p<.001), and aligns with 
previous work showing more conservative realisations for 
older, male speakers [4]. There is additionally an effect of 
duration (b=-0.32, p<.001), with shorter tokens more retracted. 
Conversely, PC2 is linked largely to F1 differences across the 
vowel, with negative scores indicating more open FLEECE. This 
is closely tied to pre-nasal context (b=-0.90, p<.001): post-hoc 
analyses reveal that pre-nasal tokens are significantly more 
open than pre-obstruent or word-final FLEECE (p<.001). 
 
Figure 1: Positive (+) and negative (–) perturbations 
of mean F1 and F2 trajectories (solid lines), for PC1 
(left panels for each vowel) and PC2 (right panels). 
 
Figure 2: Mean formant trajectories for six diphthongs 
by age group and gender (10%-90% points). 
5629
For NEAR (Figure 1; second row, left panels), PC1 describes 
greater differences in F2 than F1, while PC2 is linked to both 
the F2 of vowel onset particularly, and change in F1 as the 
vowel progresses. Positive scores are associated with much 
more fronted, and higher, realisations (PC1), and flatter F1 
trajectory (PC2). Negative scores indicate far more retracted, 
and lower, NEAR (PC1), and greater change in F1, translating to 
gradual vowel lowering over the full duration (PC2). Context 
appears salient for PC1 (b=-0.56, p<.001) and PC2 (b=-0.38, 
p<.001): word-final tokens are more retracted, with greater 
overall lowering than pre-obstruent tokens, aligning with prior 
commentary [7, 8]. Similarly, age group explains variation in 
both PC1 (b=-0.31, p<.001) and PC2 (b=-0.34, p<.001), with 
Young Adults showing greater retraction and lowering over the 
vowel trajectory than Adults. Gender (b=-0.22, p<.001) also 
shows an expected pattern of variation for PC1, with more 
retracted NEAR for women than men (i.e., women are more 
advanced in change). Taken together, these PCs reflect greater 
excursion through the vowel space (fronter onset, greater 
retraction and lowering across the vowel) for word -final 
environments, and for younger speakers and women (Figure 2). 
Differences in PC1 and PC2 scores for GOAT (Figure 1; 
second row, right panels) affect the vowel trajectory as a whole. 
The patterns of dynamicity are noteworthy here too, with 
relatively flat F2 suggesting minimal change in this dimension, 
while the pre-midpoint rise in F1 indicates a degree of vowel 
lowering, before raising again. Positive PC1 scores correspond 
to higher and fronter realisations, and negative scores are linked 
to lower and backer GOAT. This can be attributed to context: 
post-hoc analyses indicate pre-nasal (b=-0.56, p<.001) and 
word-final (b=-0.20, p<.05) tokens are significantly lower and 
backer than pre-obstruent GOAT, and pre-nasal is also lower and 
backer than word-final (p<.001). For PC2, positive scores 
reflect higher and backer realisations, and negative scores 
indicate lower and fronter vowels; that is, the direction of 
change over time for GOAT [7]. Indeed, effects of age group 
(b=0.67, p<.001) and gender (b=0.35, p<.001) suggest higher 
and backer GOAT for Young Adults and women than for Adults 
and men, respectively (Figure 2). Post-hoc analyses for context 
indicate pre-nasal tokens are lower and fronter (p<.001), which, 
together with PC1 results, suggests GOAT lowering pre-nasally. 
For MOUTH (Figure 1; third row, left panels) positive PC1 
scores correspond to lower F2 (greater retraction) over the 
vowel trajectory, and more steeply rising F1 prior to the 
midpoint. Negative scores instead show a steadier rise in F1 
(i.e., a more gradually opening vowel), and fronter realisations. 
There are minimal differences in F1 at vowel offset. Several 
factors seem to account for this variation. Age group (b=0.94, 
p<.001), gender (b=0.44, p<.001), and social class (MC vs. 
WC: b=0.35, p<.001) have an effect, with significantly lower 
and backer MOUTH for Young Adults and women (Figure 2), 
and MC speakers (post-hoc: p<.001), with no difference 
between WC and LMC speakers. Pre-nasal context is linked to 
higher and fronter realisations than other environments (post-
hoc: p<.001), as is shorter duration (b=0.21, p<.001). PC2 
explains variation in F1 of the second half of the vowel, with 
negative scores demonstrating a greater degree of change in 
vowel height than positive scores, as the vowel moves from 
front to back (when we consider the F2 tracks). PC2 is linked 
to age group (b=0.24, p<.01), with Young Adults having higher 
(yet still more retracted) trajectories in the second half of 
MOUTH than Adults, consistent with prior work [4, 7]. 
For PRICE (Figure 1; third row, right panels), positive PC1 
scores are linked to lower F1 in the first half of the vowel with 
a steady rise, and lowering F2 in the same portion of the vowel, 
while negative scores correspond to sharper F1 rise (i.e., 
quicker and greater degree of vowel opening early in the vowel) 
with gradually rising F2 (i.e., gradual fronting), consistent with 
change over time in dynamicity previously noted for PRICE [11]. 
Differences here are largely explained by social factors (age 
group b=-0.81; gender b=-0.33; social class b=-0.30; all 
p<.001), with more open and fronted PRICE for Young Adults 
and women (Figure 2), and MC speakers (vs. WC, post-hoc: 
p<.001). Pre-nasal contexts are also more retracted than other 
environments (post-hoc: p<.001). Differences in PC2 relate 
mainly to the first half of F2, and second half of F1: positive 
scores show fronter onset (and gradual fronting over the vowel), 
with a higher tail, while negative scores indicate a degree of F2 
lowering, suggesting slight retraction early in the vowel before 
fronting occurs, with a lower tail. Again, social factors explain 
this variation. An interaction of age group and gender (b=0.40, 
p<.01) indicates that Young Adult women show significantly 
fronter first half and higher tail of PRICE than Adult women 
(post-hoc: p<.05) and Young Adult men (post-hoc: p<.01), as 
do MC versus WC speakers (b=0.25, post-hoc: p<.01). 
5. Discussion and Conclusion 
At least one PC per diphthong has been identified to describe 
change over time in the expected direction for Adults versus 
Young Adults (PC1 for FACE, FLEECE, NEAR, MOUTH, and PRICE, 
and PC2 for GOAT), with women consistently more advanced in 
the direction of change. This social variation is shown in Figure 
2, and these results align with prior work on these diphthongs 
[4, 5, 7, 11, 14], while offering novel insights by identifying 
how changes in F1 and F2 trajectories co-occur. For example, 
MOUTH PC1 and PC2 demonstrate change over time in variation 
in vowel height over the trajectory, as it simultaneously retracts 
through the vowel space (Figure 1). This analysis has also 
identified linguistic conditioning of vowel dynamicity, 
particularly due to phonological context (e.g., FACE and FLEECE 
PC2, GOAT PC1). For example, pre-nasal context was found to 
promote overall lowering for FLEECE and GOAT, greater fronting 
for FACE and MOUTH, and greater retraction for PRICE, while 
differences in dynamicity for NEAR in terms of co-occurring 
retraction and F1 change appeared closely tied to whethe