DGS-MLDG: Domain Gradient Surgery Guided Meta-Learning for Domain
Generalization in Speech Deepfake Detection
Siqing QIN1, Kong Aik LEE1,∗∗, Youzhi TU1, Eng Siong CHNG2, Man-Wai MAK1
1 Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2 College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
siqing.qin@connect.polyu.hk
Abstract
Speech deepfake detection faces significant challenges due to
domain shifts. Domain generalization (DG), particularly meta-
learning for domain generalization (MLDG), offers a promising
solution by simulating and mitigating domain shifts. However,
MLDG is often hindered by conflicting gradients between its
meta-train and meta-test objectives, leading to suboptimal per-
formance. To address this problem, we propose domain gradi-
ent surgery (DGS), a meta-learning method that resolves con-
flicts through an asymmetric projection strategy. DGS removes
the destructive component from the meta-test gradient, ensuring
a conflict-free optimization trajectory versus the meta-train gra-
dient. Furthermore, we introduce layer-wise DGS (LW-DGS),
an efficient variant of DGS that dynamically identifies and
intervenes only conflict-prone layers. Extensive experiments
on challenging benchmarks demonstrate that DGS-MLDG and
LW-DGS-MLDG achieve an average relative EER reduction of
5.29% and 4.04%, respectively.
Index Terms: Speech deepfake detection, meta-learning, do-
main generalization
1. Introduction
Speech deepfakes generated by advanced algorithms pose a se-
vere threat to automatic speaker verification [1, 2] and public
information security [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. While deep learning detec-
tors perform remarkably well in controlled environments, their
reliability deteriorates significantly in real-world scenarios due
todomain shifts[8]. This phenomenon arises from a mismatch
between the training data and unseen test conditions, such as
unseen attack types [9, 10]. Unlike unsupervised domain adap-
tation (UDA), which requires access to target-domain data, do-
main generalization (DG) aims to learn domain-invariant repre-
sentations from the source domains only, making it more prac-
tical in security applications [11, 12, 13].
Standard DG approaches often rely on empirical risk min-
imization (ERM) by pooling all source domains [14, 15], but
this strategy lacks explicit exploration in domain structures. To
address this limitation, themeta-learning domain generaliza-
tion(MLDG) framework [16] has emerged as a promising al-
ternative. By treating each attack type as a separate domain,
MLDG simulates domain shifts during training through meta-
train and meta-test splits. The aim is to mitigate such domain
shifts by reducing the performance gap between the splits. Ex-
tensions such as multi-task meta-learning (MTML) have been
proposed to stabilize the meta-optimization trajectory and help
escape local minima [17]. In [18], MLDG was combined with
parameter-efficient tuning methods such as low-rank adaptation
**indicates the corresponding author.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Training Steps
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Cosine Similarity
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Density
Figure 1:Negative cosine similarity between the meta-train
gradient and meta-test gradient of MLDG during training.
(LoRA) [19]. These approaches typically outperform ERM in
cross-domain evaluations.
However, applying MLDG to large-scale speech backbones
introduces a critical optimization bottleneck known asgradient
conflict, which is a serious issue in multi-task learning (MTL)
and DG [20, 21, 22]. Our analysis reveals that the gradients, de-
rived from the meta-train and meta-test optimization of MLDG,
frequently point in opposite directions, as shown in Figure 1.
The right panel shows the probability density (distribution) of
cosine similarity values across all training steps, and higher den-
sity indicates values that occur more frequently. Simple aggre-
gation of these gradients, also called naive gradient aggrega-
tion (NGA), can cancel out conflicting gradient accumulation,
leading to destructive model optimization. On the other hand,
gradient-based methods, such as PCGrad [20], GradVac[23],
and CAGrad [24], are not directly applicable to the bi-level opti-
mization of meta-learning, where preserving specific directional
components is crucial.
To address the gradient conflict issue of MLDG, we propose
domain gradient surgery-guided MLDG (DGS-MLDG), a
principled framework designed to resolve gradient conflicts in
speech deepfake detection, as shown in Figures 2(a) and 2(c).
Unlike NGA, DGS projects the conflicting meta-test gradient
onto the normal plane of the meta-train gradient. This op-
eration removes the destructive parameter update between the
meta-train and meta-test optimization. Furthermore, we in-
troducelayer-wise DGS (LW-DGS-MLDG)to learn domain-
invariant and task-specific components based on layer-level gra-
dient statistics. It is motivated by the observation that domain-
specific information and artifact traces are associated with spe-
cific parameters, such as the affine parameters in normalization
layer [25, 26], and with early layers of self-supervised learning
(SSL) models [27]. LW-DGS applies surgery selectively to this
conflict-prone subset determined byreal-time cosine similarity
monitoring.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
5441
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1042
(c) DGS-MLDG Update Direction  
NGA  DGS
Meta-train gradient
Meta-test gradient
Update direction
Conflict component
Original gradient
(with conflict)
Meta-test 
(a) DGS-MLDG Training Batches sampling
Batches sampling
Source domains
···
···
Meta-train 
domains
Meta-split
···
Meta-test 
domains
···
Meta-train 
batches
···
Meta-test 
batches
Meta-train 
Meta-
optimization 
For each iteration
Selective 
mechanism 
(SM)
Naive gradient
aggregation
(NGA)
XLSR
model
Linear
projection BiMambas Prediction
head
Bonafide
Spoofed
(b) Model Structure
Domain gradient 
surgery (DGS)-
guided 
aggregation
Figure 2:Overview of the proposed DGS-MLDG framework. (a) The training pipeline simulates domain shift via meta-splits and
resolving conflicts via the selective mechanism (SM). (b) The backbone architecture used for deepfake detection. (c) Geometric com-
parison showing how DGS corrects the update direction by projecting conflicting gradients, avoiding the oscillation of Naive Gradient
Aggregation (NGA).
follows: (1) We provide an investigation of gradient dynam-
ics in MLDG for speech deepfake detection, identifying gra-
dient conflict between meta-train and meta-test objectives as
a factor limiting generalization performance. (2) We propose
the DGS-MLDG framework, which utilizes a novel projection
mechanism to mitigate gradient conflicts. (3) We further de-
velop a layer-wise strategy (LW-DGS) to address layer-level
conflicts. Extensive experiments on multiple out-of-domain
datasets demonstrate that our method achieves improvements
against a strong ERM baseline. Evaluation covers state-of-the-
art synthesis attacks, codec/transmission artifacts, and in-the-
wild recordings.
2. Proposed Methods
This section introduces domain gradient surgery (DGS) and its
efficient variant, layer-wise DGS (LW-DGS), to mediate the
gradient conflict in MLDG.
2.1. Preliminaries: Framework
As illustrated in Figure 2(a), MLDG involves a meta-train
(source adaptation) phase and a meta-test (generalization)
phase. The source domainsS={S i}S
i=1 are partitioned into
Vmeta-train domains ˆSandS−Vmeta-test domains ˜Sin
each iteration. The meta-train lossL mtr guides the inner-loop
adaptation, while the meta-test lossL mte evaluates the gener-
alization on adapted parametersθ ′ =θ−α∇ θLmtr(θ). The
overall objective minimizes the weighted sum:
arg min
θ
Lmtr(θ) +βL mte(θ−α∇ θLmtr(θ)),(1)
whereβweights the meta-test phase. Standard MLDG uses
naive gradient aggregation (NGA) to combine gradients lin-
early. NGA makes the model perform well on source domains
while maintaining the capacity for fast adaptation to unseen do-
mains. However, this often leads to conflicting gradients be-
tweenLmtr andLmte, hindering convergence.
2.2. Domain Gradient Surgery (DGS)
The gradients from the two phases, meta-train gradientF=
∇Lmtr and meta-test gradientG=∇L mte, often conflict
with each other, leading to unstable optimization as depicted
in Figure 2(c). DGS uses an innovative selective mechanism to
address the gradient conflict issue.
Selective Mechanism (SM):DGS monitors the inner prod-
uct betweenFandG. If⟨G,F⟩≥0, gradients are combined
directly. If⟨G,F⟩<0, signifying conflict, the DGS projection
mechanism is enabled.
Meta-Optimization with DGS:When conflict is detected
(⟨G,F⟩<0), DGS employs an asymmetric projection strat-
egy. It treatsFas the anchor for domain adaptation and re-
moves only the detrimental component ofGthat deviates from
F:
Gproj =
(
G−

⟨G,F⟩
||F|| 2+ϵ

F,if⟨G,F⟩<0,
G,otherwise.
(2)
Here,ϵis a small constant (e.g.,10 −8) for numerical stability.
DGS ensures⟨G proj,F⟩≥0, guaranteeing a conflict-free gra-
dient descent. The model parametersθare then updated:
θ←θ−γ(F+βG proj).(3)
This asymmetric strategy is crucial for stable meta-
optimization, as it explicitly preserves the essential domain-
specific knowledge provided byFfor inner-loop adaptation,
allowingG proj to guide generalization effectively. In contrast,
NGA may lead to suboptimal oscillating updates (Figure
2(c)). This mechanism distinguishes DGS from multi-task
gradient-based surgery methods such as PCGrad [20]. The
complete procedure is in Algorithm 1.
5442
2.3. Layer-Wise Domain Gradient Surgery (LW-DGS)
Global DGS can be computationally intensive for large back-
bones (e.g., 300M-parameter SSL backbones). Furthermore, as
observed in [25, 26, 27], some parameters, such as normaliza-
tion layers and early SSL layers, are more sensitive to domain-
specific statistics and artifact traces. This motivates LW-DGS,
an efficient approach that performs surgery only where conflicts
genuinely occur at the layer level.
Layer-Wise Selective Mechanism (LW-SM):LW-DGS
performsindependent conflict detectionat the layer level. Let
θk denote a specific trainable layer (e.g., a weight matrix)
within the model’s total parameter setθ. For each parame-
terθ k, we consider its corresponding meta-train gradient ten-
sorF k =∇ θkLmtr(θ)and meta-test gradient tensorG k =
∇θkLmte(θ′). We then compute their individual cosine simi-
larity:
cosθk = ⟨Fk,Gk⟩
||Fk||·||G k||.(4)
Dynamic Surgery:The selective modification is then ap-
plieddynamically and independentlyto each parameter based
on its instantaneous conflict status. When gradient tensorsF k
andG k are found in conflict (i.e.,⟨F k,Gk⟩<0), the compo-
nent ofGk that opposesFk is adjusted.
Gproj
k =
(
Gk− ⟨Gk,Fk⟩
||Fk||2+ϵFk,if⟨F k,Gk⟩<0
Gk,otherwise. (5)
Here,ϵis a constant (e.g.,10 −8) for numerical stability. This
operation effectively suppresses the conflict ofG k withF k at
the layer level, ensuring that the modified gradientG proj
k con-
tributes constructively to the update direction.
This fine-grained, layer-level monitoring provides a signif-
icant advantage by precisely identifying and intervening only
on components most susceptible to domain shifts. Conversely,
domain-insensitive parameters are inherently optimized for the
core binary classification task in each minibatch. Therefore,
LW-DGS naturally bypasses these insensitive parameters and
focuses on the parameters that are likely to face gradient con-
flict only, saving computational resources.
3. Experiments and results
3.1. Experimental Conditions
Training settings.We selected three datasets for training:
ASVspoof 2019 LA [3] (ASV2019), ASVspoof 5 [5], and
CFAD [6]. The training processes employed both the origi-
nal training sets and development sets under varied conditions.
For naive joint-training minimizing empirical risk (i.e., ERM),
we concatenate the three training sets to train the model collec-
tively. For meta-learning, we utilized the three datasets to define
the source domains, resulting in a total of 22 domains: 6 attack
types from the ASVspoof 2019 LA training set, 8 attack types
from the ASVspoof 5 (ASV5) training set, and 8 attack types
from the CFAD training set.
Implementation details.The model structure follows the
design proposed in [28], as shown in Figure 2(b). To enhance
data variability, RawBoost [29] was employed to introduce sta-
tionary, signal-independent additive noise. During training, au-
dio segments were cropped or concatenated to approximately 4
seconds (64,600 samples). The Adam optimizer, with a learn-
ing rate of10 −6 and a weight decay of10 −4, was utilized to
Algorithm 1DGS-MLDG for Speech Deepfake Detection
1:Input: DomainsS
2:Init: Model parametersθ. Hyperparametersα,β,γ.
3:foreach iterationdo
4:Split: ˆSand ˜S←S
5:Initialize accumulators:F←0,G←0
6:Meta-train:
7:forminibatchB ˆSi from ˆSi do
8:Compute gradientF i =∇θLmtr(θ,B ˆSi )
9:Accumulate gradientF←F+ 1
VFi
10:end for
11:Inner-update:θ ′←θ−αF
12:Meta-test:
13:forminibatchB ˜Sj from ˜Sdo
14:Compute gradientG j =∇θLmte(θ′;B ˜Sj )
15:Accumulate gradientG←G+ 1
S−VGj
16:end for
17:DGS:
18:if⟨G,F⟩<0then
19:G=G−

⟨G,F⟩
||F|| 2+ϵ

F
20:end if
21:Meta-optimization:θ←θ−γ× 1
2 (F+βG)
22:end for
optimize the weighted cross-entropy loss with a batch size of
12. An inner learning rate of10 −2 and aβof 0.5, determined
by the validation set, yields optimal performance.
Evaluation settings.For in-dataset evaluation, we used the
ASVspoof 2021 DF (ASV21) test set [4], and the ASVspoof 5
test set (ASV5). For cross-dataset evaluation, we selected four
additional datasets: theADD 2023[30] test sets (comprising
Test Set R1 and Test Set R2), theIn-the-wild[31], theCodec-
Fake[32] test sets. The CodecFake evaluation comprises 7 sub-
sets, and we calculated the mean EER across them. We treated
the CFAD unseen test set (CFAD) as a cross-dataset evaluation
set because the fake attack types and real speech sources do not
overlap in it.
3.2. Results and Analysis
Gradient Alignment Analysis.We first analyze the evolu-
tion of gradient dynamics during training. As illustrated in Fig-
ure 3, the cosine similarity between meta-train and meta-test
gradients in our proposed DGS framework exhibits a consistent
upward trend, converging to high positive values. We observe
that DGS-MLDG is concentrated around slightly higher cosine
similarity across all training steps. In contrast, the standard
MLDG baseline shows fluctuating low similarity. This obser-
vation shows that DGS effectively alleviates gradient conflicts,
aligning source-domain adaptation with cross-domain general-
ization objectives.
Cross-Dataset Generalization Performance.Table 1
presents Equal Error Rate (EER) results on cross-dataset bench-
marks. The ERM baseline consistently yields high error rates,
particularly on distinct domains like TIMIT-TTS and In-the-
Wild, confirming its inability to learn domain-invariant repre-
sentations. While the standard MLDG provides marginal im-
provements over ERM, it still suffers from optimization insta-
bility due to conflicting gradients. Our DGS-MLDG frame-
work significantly outperforms all baselines, achieving the
lowest EERs across nearly all cross-dataset evaluation sets.
Specifically, it attains a relative performance improvement of
5443
Table 1:Comparison of EER (%) among main methods. The last column shows the cross-dataset average relative improvement w.r.t.
the ERM baseline (↑). Bold and underline denote the lowest and the second-lowest EERs for each dataset.
Methods ASV21↓ASV5↓CFAD↓ADD2023 R1↓ADD2023 R2↓In-the-wild↓CodecFake↓A vg. Rel. Imp. (%)↑
ERM 0.92 8.5724.33 19.16 23.23 6.71 7.66 -
MLDG 1.05 9.69 24.16 18.14 23.03 6.47 7.24 2.53
DGS-MLDG (ours) 1.00 10.24 23.86 17.7623.195.23 6.76 5.29
LW-DGS-MLDG (ours) 1.02 9.55 23.8317.88 22.686.15 7.27 4.04
Table 2:Ablation study: EER (%) under all evaluation settings.
ExperimentsASV21↓ASV5↓CFAD↓ADD2023 R1↓ADD2023 R2↓In-the-wild↓CodecFake↓
Ablation①0.97 9.82 24.27 20.43 23.68 6.15 7.27
Ablation②1.16 9.57 23.93 18.03 22.75 6.58 7.27
Table 3:Comparison of EER (%) results across different gradi-
ent alignment methods.
System In-the-wild CodecFake
XLSR-Mamba 6.71 7.66
w/ MLDG training 6.47 7.24
+ DGS (ours)5.23 6.76
+ LW-DGS (ours) 6.15 7.27
+ PCGrad 6.17 7.69
+ GradVac 6.34 7.40
+ CAGrad 7.40 7.36
5.29%over the strongest baseline. The gains are particu-
larly pronounced on challenging datasets such as ADD2023 R1,
CodecFake, and In-the-Wild, demonstrating better generaliza-
tion against unseen codecs and real-world spoofing scenarios.
Furthermore, the efficient LW-DGS-MLDG achieves a compa-
rable relative improvement of4.04%, validating that resolving
conflicts in a small subset of sensitive parameters is sufficient
to obtain substantial generalization gains. These results con-
firm that removing conflicting components allows a stable meta-
optimization under rigorous domain shifts.
3.3. Comparison with Gradient Alignment Methods
In Table 3, our proposed methods are compared with general
multi-task gradient surgery techniques, including PCGrad [20],
GradVac [23], and CAGrad [24]. A critical observation is that
these methods, which employ bidirectional gradient surgery
(treating tasks symmetrically), fail to consistently outperform
the standard MLDG baseline. For instance, PCGrad degrades
on CodecFake. This suggests that treating the meta-train and
meta-test objectives as equal peers disrupts the domain knowl-
edge learned during the meta-train phase.
In contrast, our proposed DGS and LW-DGS maintain con-
sistent gradient directions between two phases during parameter
update. This asymmetric strategy follows the bi-level optimiza-
tion of meta-learning, preserving the primary adaptation signal
while filtering out destructive interference from the generaliza-
tion objective. Consequently, DGS achieves the lowest EERs
on In-the-wild and CodecFake, confirming that the asymmetric
strategy is essential for robust domain generalization.
3.4. Ablation Studies
Impact of Projection Direction.We investigate another di-
rection for resolving gradient conflicts by comparing DGS with
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Training Steps
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Cosine Similarity
MLDG (Neg%=33.0%)
DGS-MLDG (Neg%=23.5%)
PW-DGS-MLDG (Neg%=30.9%)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Density
Figure 3:Cosine similarity comparison across MLDG, DGS-
MLDG, and LW-DGS-MLDG. Conflicts decrease via proposed
DGS and LW-DGS.
its variants. Ablation①uses theReverse Projection, where
the conflicting meta-train gradient is projected onto the normal
plane of the meta-test gradient. As shown in Table 2, a variant
significantly underperforms the proposed DGS. The degrada-
tion inReverse Projectionconfirms that the meta-train gradi-
ent encodes domain-specific knowledge essential for inner-loop
adaptation; modifying it according to the meta-test objective
compromises the model’s ability to learn basic discriminative
features.
Effectiveness of Layer-Wise Monitoring.We further ver-
ify the necessity of monitoring the entire model in LW-DGS.
We conduct an experiment (Ablation②) that restricts gradient
surgery to the pre-trained SSL backbone, leaving the down-
stream BiMamba backend untouched. Results in Table 2 show
that it results in higher EERs. This validates the advantage of
our LW-DGS mechanism, which dynamically identifies and ad-
dresses conflicts acrossallmodel parameters without imposing
artificial architectural constraints.
4. Conclusion
This paper addressed the critical challenge of domain general-
ization in speech deepfake detection. We identified that while
MLDG offers a promising paradigm, its effectiveness is often
limited by conflicting gradients between meta-train and meta-
test objectives. To overcome this, we proposed domain gradient
surgery (DGS), a novel framework that systematically resolves
these conflicts through an asymmetric gradient projection strat-
egy. Its efficient variant, layer-wise DGS (LW-DGS), further
enhances scalability by dynamically targeting only conflict-
prone layers. Extensive experiments on challenging bench-
marks demonstrated significant reductions in EER.
5444
5. Acknowledgment
This work was supported in part by the Innovation and
Technology Fund of the Hong Kong SAR (Project No.
MHP/048/24), and the National Key R&D Program of China
(2024YFE0217200).
6. Use of Generative AI Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used only for language polishing and
formatting assistance. All scientific content, experiments, and
analyses were produced and verified by the authors.