Returning the Turn: Do Backchannels Pattern More Like Turn-Holds or
Turn-Changes Given Preceding Syntactic Completion and Boundary Tones?
Ari¨elle Reitsema ID 1,∗∗, Matthijs Westera ID 1, Yiya Chen ID 1, Johanneke Caspers ID 1
1 Leiden University Centre for Linguistics, the Netherlands
a.reitsema@hum.leidenuniv.nl, m.westera@hum.leidenuniv.nl, yiya.chen@hum.leidenuniv.nl,
j.caspers@hum.leidenuniv.nl
Abstract
Backchannels are short listener response tokens such as “uh-
huh” and “yeah” that signal understanding and encourage the
speaker to go on. Several backchannel-inviting cues have been
identified in the speech signal directly preceding backchan-
nels, including low and rising final intonation. Since studies
on intonation and turn-taking in Dutch have previously treated
backchannels as a subclass of turn holds, backchannel-inviting
cues in Dutch still lack clarity. The present study re-examines
the place of backchannels in the turn-taking system of Dutch
based on their cues, asking the question of whether they more
closely resemble turn holds or changes in terms of immediately
preceding boundary tones and syntactic completion. The results
show that backchannels pattern differently from both turn holds
and changes, while showing a relatively closer resemblance to
the latter category.
Index Terms: turn-taking, backchannels, boundary tones, syn-
tactic completion
1. Introduction
In conversation, backchannels are short, non-disruptive listener
responses such as “uh-huh” or “yeah” that indicate understand-
ing and/or agreement, whilst encouraging the initial speaker
to continue speaking. Backchannels aid coordination between
speakers by providing listener feedback [1], establishing com-
mon ground [2], and contribute to the smoothness of conversa-
tion [3]. Introduced by Yngve [4], the term refers to the exis-
tence of a “back channel” as opposed to the “front channel”, as-
sociated with, respectively, the listener and the primary speaker
at a given moment. This aligns with the notion of backchannels
as not constituting genuine dialogue turns [5], in the sense of
not being a formal conversational move such as a response to a
question [6] and not making claim to a larger turn at talk (which
would place the utterance in the front channel). In Schegloff’s
words, “uh huh, nods and the like” can be used for “passing the
opportunity to do a full turn at talk” [7, p. 88]. Studying the
occurrence and patterning of backchannels can help us under-
stand how interlocutors coordinate whose turn it is to speak as
the conversation unfolds, as turn-taking in everyday conversa-
tion is a highly collaborative process.
The present work investigates in which kinds of situations
backchannels arise, specifically, which kinds of communica-
tive cues precede backchannels. Previous work (overview be-
low) has identified cues that specifically invite backchannel re-
sponses (see e.g. [8]) as well as a range of turn-holding and turn
yielding cues – such as intonation, gaze, gesture, and lexico-
syntactic cues – with which speakers indicate their intention to
**indicates the corresponding author.
hold or yield the turn when a transition relevance place (TRP)
[9] is reached. Moreover, speakers can deliberately leave a mo-
ment of “nontalk” to give listeners the opportunity to initiate
repair in case their preceding talk was a trouble-source. The
question of which cues specifically invite backchannels, and
how these relate to the turn-taking system, is a complicated one.
For one, backchannels are optional. Second, the same cues can
often plausibly lead to either a backchannel or a hold or change.
Third, empirical work on naturalistic dialogue is still relatively
cumbersome and scarce. Fourth, existing work does not treat
backchannels uniformly, resulting in a murky picture. For in-
stance, Schegloff’s characterisation of backchannels as “pass-
ing an opportunity to initiate repair” [7, p. 88] would lead one
to expect that backchannels are often preceded by turn-yielding
cues, but in corpus work by Caspers [10] on prosodic turn-
taking cues in Dutch, TRPs preceding backchannels are cate-
gorized as “turn holds” based on the rationale that backchan-
nels do not make claim to the turn (p. 258), resulting in the
cues preceding backchannels being grouped with turn-holding
cues. Therefore, more research is needed on backchannel-
inviting cues, specifically on whether they pattern more with
turn-holding cues or turn-yielding cues.
We pursue this question empirically based on a corpus of
over one hour of Dutch task-oriented dialogue, the Dutch Map
Task Corpus [11], for which we reuse and extend existing tran-
scription layers for prosody, syntactic completion and turn-
taking. We limit our present investigation to the status, as po-
tential backchannel-inviting cues, of syntactic completion (in-
complete or potentially complete), final boundary tones (rising,
low or level) and their possible interaction.
1.1. Backchannel-inviting cues
By “backchannel-inviting cues” we here mean “places where
back-channel feedback is especially appropriate” [12, p. 1185].
While it is clear that backchannels are not produced at random,
and can be “cued, encouraged, or allowed by the speaker” [12,
p. 1203], they are commonly characterised as non-obligatory,
and it is intrinsically difficult to reliably identify cues for an op-
tional type of discourse move [13]. Still, existing work has iden-
tified a range of possible or partial cues. We focus our overview
on utterance-final intonational cues and syntactic completion.
Ward and Tsukahara [12] find that a low pitch region of at
least 110 ms in duration precedes backchannels in 48% of the
occurrences in a corpus of spontaneous American English dia-
logue (and 56% in a Japanese corpus). Still, such regions are
only followed by backchannel responses in 18% of the cases
(and 34% in Japanese), underlining backchannels’ optionality.
They propose this low pitch region as a predictor for backchan-
nel occurrence. By contrast, a corpus study on American En-
2837
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3530
glish task-oriented dialogue by Gravano and Hirschberg [8]
found finalrisingpitch to cue backchannels. They identified
six cues that were more frequent ininterpausal units(IPUs;
[6]) before backchannels than before holds or non-overlapping
changes. Final rising pitch (measured as a steeper f0 slope
over the last 200 and 300 ms of an IPU) surfaced as an impor-
tant cue. In their dataset, backchannels predominantly followed
high boundary tones (81%), changes mostly either low (47%) or
high (36%), and turn holds mostly level boundary tones (52%).
Despite differing distributions, intonation preceding backchan-
nels appears more similar to that preceding changes than holds.
Casting some doubt on the role of intonation in effectively
differentiating backchannel occurrences from other turn tran-
sitions, Paierl et al. [14] found pitch-related features to be
of very low importance in predicting backchannel occurrence
in a corpus of spontaneous Austrian German dialogue. They
compared acoustic characteristics and turn-taking functions –
which also encoded information on syntactic completion – of
units preceding backchannels to unitsnotpreceding backchan-
nels. Alongside somenon-intonationalprosodic cues, their
turn-taking features were the most informative predictors for
backchannels: backchannels most frequently followed longer
units ending in points of potential syntactic completion, and
least frequently followed incomplete units (only 5%), short par-
ticles or other backchannels. Syntactic completion was also
found as a possible predictor in the aforementioned study by
Gravano and Hirschberg [8]: their “textual completion” sur-
faced as the strongest turn-yielding cue: 82% of IPUs preceding
non-overlapping changes were labelled as complete, while this
was only 53% before holds. They do not report textual comple-
tion distributions before backchannels.
For Dutch, the language under consideration in the present
study, to our awareness no study looks specifically for into-
national backchannel-inviting cues. Caspers [10] does briefly
report frequencies for backchannels relating to syntactic com-
pletion: 165 backchannels were produced following a syntac-
tic completion point, contrasting with only 28 after incomplete
IPUs. However, in the investigation of melodic turn-keeping
and turn-yielding cues, backchannels were grouped with turn
holds, based on the rationale that backchannels do not make
claim to the turn. 323 level boundary tones (85% of all level
boundaries), 326 high (57%), and 233 low boundaries (46%)
resulted in turn holds, which thus included the backchannel oc-
currences. The turn holds after level tones were strongly corre-
lated with syntactic incompletion (c.f. Rossi [15] who found a
correlation between completion and the final pitch height of ut-
terances preceding backchannels). The present study follows a
similar methodology, but aims at teasing apart the features spe-
cific to backchannels. After all, if backchannels are conceived
of as “passing an opportunity to initiate repair” [7, p. 88], and
repair would constitute a genuine dialogue turn, one would ex-
pect contexts preceding backchannels to be comparable to some
types of turn yields. The occurrence of a backchannel as op-
posed to a turn change, then, may sometimes be more depen-
dent on whether repair is needed than on the preceding cues.
Looking ahead, we expect that backchannels differ from
turn holds, and are more similar to turn changes, in that they
more frequently follow syntactically complete utterances as
well as high or low (as opposed to level) boundary tones than
holds. At the same time, we expect backchannel-inviting cues
to be distinct from both turn-yielding and turn-keeping cues,
though in which way exactly is unclear based on the English-
oriented literature (with a low-pitch region according to Ward
and Tsukahara, or a rise according to Gravano and Hirschberg).
2. Methods
2.1. Corpus data
In this study, a little over an hour of task-oriented dialogue from
the Dutch Map Task Corpus [11] was analysed. Closely follow-
ing the set-up of the original HCRC Map Task [16], the cor-
pus consists of essentially spontaneous conversations, guided
by a map with named landmarks and a route. During the task,
two speakers receive a version of the map and are assigned “in-
struction giver” and “instruction follower” roles. The former
needs to explain the route drawn on his or her map to the latter,
who needs to reproduce that route on his or her unmarked map.
Small differences in reference points between the two maps
complicate the task, yielding an interactive conversation with
varied turn-taking behaviour. Speakers could see each other,
but not each other’s maps, making verbal cooperation crucial.
The recordings were made at the Phonetics Laboratory of
Nijmegen University, with 8 participants (6 female; 2 male)
in differing pair configurations. All participants were students,
who were native speakers of Dutch. Recordings from twelve of
the dialogues were included in this study: eight dialogues had
previously been annotated by Caspers (see e.g. [10]), and were
made available for reuse in this study. The annotations were
checked and adjusted, and recordings from four more conversa-
tions were manually transcribed and annotated in a compatible
format. Annotations were made in Praat [17] TextGrids, and
Praat scripts were created to speed up some of the manual an-
notation work and efficiently extract the annotations.
2.2. Annotation
2.2.1. Interpausal units (IPU)
As an objectively measurable proxy for turn-relevant compo-
nents, we used inter-pausal units (IPU, see e.g. [6, 8]) to seg-
ment the conversational data. An IPU was defined as a maximal
stretch of same-speaker speech not interrupted by either a pause
longer than 100 ms or speech from the other speaker, in line
with the approach taken by [10]. Pauses were detected automat-
ically using a Praat script, supplemented by substantial manual
correction. Each transition to a new IPU served as a data point
in our analysis, for which we annotated the associated transition
type, syntactic completion, and intonation, as described below.
2.2.2. Transition types
For each IPU-onset, we determined its relation to the preceding
IPU. Three such transition types were relevant to our analysis:
• HOLD(H): IPU-onsets after an IPU of the same speaker.
• CHANGE(C): IPU-onsets preceded by an IPU of the other
speaker, where neither the current IPU nor the preceding IPU
is a backchannel, and the onset is not concurrent with an IPU
of the other speaker. IPUs with brief, non-intrusive overlaps
at their onset were still counted as changes, granted that the
nuclear pitch accent of the preceding IPU had fully been re-
alised.
• BACKCHANNEL(B): IPU-onsets preceded by an IPU of the
other speaker, where the current IPU is a short utterance that
is not an answer to an explicit question [6], but rather ex-
presses understanding and/or agreement and encourages the
other speaker to continue talking. The current IPU is not an
attempt to claim the floor, such that the backchannel is either
followed by or concurrent with an IPU of the other speaker,
or followed by a long pause and a not directly related IPU.
2838
Figure 1:Proportion of syntactically complete and incomplete
IPUs by following transition type
2.2.3. IPU-final boundary tones and syntactic completion
A transcription of the IPU-final intonation was made using the
Transcription of Dutch Intonation system (ToDI [18]). Final
boundary tones were categorised either as high (H%, for rising
contours), low (L%), or level (%, including IPU-final plateaus
as well as non-plateau contours ending neither high nor low).
At the end of each IPU, an evaluation was made of whether
the speaker’s utterance could be seen as syntactically complete
up to that point. Following Ford and Thompson [19], an utter-
ance was judged as “syntactically complete if, in its discourse
context, it could be interpreted as a complete clause, that is, with
an overt or directly recoverable predicate, without considering
intonation or interactional import” [p. 143]. This evaluation
was thus made incrementally: taking into account the preced-
ing discourse context, and without looking ahead. This allowed
for IPUs to be marked as potentially complete, even if the next
IPU further extended it, and allowed IPUs to be marked as in-
complete, even if not completed in a following IPU. Judgements
were made based on the orthographic transcriptions.
2.3. Dataset for analysis
Given the aim of comparing backchannel contexts to prototyp-
ical hold and change contexts, only IPUs matching one of the
descriptions in 2.2.2 were included in the dataset. Thus, IPUs
with substantially overlapped onsets (interruptions and simul-
taneous starts) were excluded, as well as e.g. IPUs following
simultaneously ended overlapping IPUs, and the first IPU of
a conversation. Further, IPUs where the preceding boundary
tone could not be determined (e.g. if the previous IPU ended
in laughter or otherwise could not meaningfully be transcribed
with ToDI) were also not considered. Finally, we excluded IPUs
directly following (or starting during) backchannels, since treat-
ing them as either turn holds or changes would presuppose an
answer to the research question and muddy the analyses.
3. Results
The final dataset contained 1910 observations: 736 holds (H:
38.5%), 280 backchannels (B: 14.7%), and 894 changes (C:
46.8%). Figure 1 shows, per transition type (horizontal), the
distribution of syntactically complete vs. incomplete IPUs im-
mediately preceding them. It shows that, whileHis equally
preceded by syntactically complete (52.3%) and incomplete
IPUs (47.7%), andCis typically preceded by complete IPUs
Figure 2:Proportion of low, level, and high IPU-final boundary
tones by following transition type
(94.2%),Bfalls in-between (82.1% complete). These descrip-
tive statistics thus suggest thatBdiffers from bothCandHin
terms of the syntactic completion of the directly preceding IPU.
Figure 2 shows, likewise per transition type, the distribu-
tion of final boundary tones of the immediately preceding IPUs.
When comparingBtoH, it stands out thatBis preceded by
fewer level boundary tones (14.3%) thanH(50.8%), and by
more high boundary tones (B: 50.0%,H: 20.0%). Compar-
ingBtoCshows thatBis preceded slightly more often by a
high tone (50.0%) and slightly less often by a low tone (35.7%)
thanC(37.7% and 50.9%, respectively), while the proportion
of preceding level boundary tones is very similar (B: 14.3%,C:
11.9%). Despite some differences,Bthus appears to pattern
more likeCthan likeHin terms of preceding boundary tones.
Taking the distributions ofB,H, andCobservations across
all combinations of syntactic completion and boundary tone cat-
egories, the absolute difference in percentage points is 78.8 for
H–Band 32.9 forC–B, pointing to a relatively larger differ-
ence between the former two transition types.
To assess the foregoing more quantitatively, that is, to mea-
sure and compare the similarity ofBandCvs.BandH, we
shall take into account not the distributions in the corpus as
such, but the actualeffectsof features of the preceding IPU on
transition type, as well as their interactions (e.g., the effect of
boundary tones as dependent on syntactic completion). To this
end, a multinomial mixed regression model [20] was fit in R
[21] using themblogitfunction in themclogitlibrary [22]. The
turn transition types (H, B, and C) were the three levels of the
multinomial outcome variable of the model. The fixed effects
structure was chosen based on theoretical considerations [23],
and consisted of syntactic completion (complete, incomplete),
boundary tone (L%, %, H%), and their interaction. Checks were
performed to ensure that there was no problematic collinear-
ity – i.e., a linear dependence relationship – between the two
main predictor variables. Althoughboundary toneandsyntac-
tic completionwere reasonably strongly associated (Cram ´er’s
V: 0.619), generalised variance inflation factor scores calcu-
lated with thecarpackage [24] indicated only low to moderate
collinearity (GVIF boundary tone: 1.281, syntactic completion:
2.694, interaction: 1.848), so both predictors were kept. The
most parsimonious random effects structure was chosen based
on the Akaike information criterion (AIC) and accounted for
random variability between speakers and dialogues via random
intercepts. Table 1 lists the resulting model output.
AsBwas set as the reference level of transition type,Hand
2839
Cwere each compared toB, yielding two results for each effect
estimate (β, the change in log-odds of observing eitherHorC
overB, for the given predictor level relative to the intercept).
Relevant to interpreting the output is that weighted effect cod-
ing was applied to the predictor variables [25], enabling us to
interpret predictor estimates as main effects relative to the sam-
ple mean, not dependent on reference values of other predictors.
Interpreting the output, a number of differences stand out.
First, the two estimates for the effect of the level boundary tone:
for theH–Bcomparison, the estimate (β: 0.760 SE: 0.156,z:
4.878,p:<0.001) tells us that the increase in the log-odds of
observingHinstead of aBwhen the preceding boundary tone
is level (as compared to the sample mean log-odds of observing
HoverB) is significant. Phrased more plainly: if the IPU-final
boundary tone is level (rather than high or low), we will become
even more likely to observeHthanBthan we already were. In
contrast, the corresponding estimate for theC–Bcomparison
(β: 0.045, SE: 0.161,z: 0.280,p: 0.779) shows us that the
change in the log-odds of observingCoverBdue to the effect of
the level boundary tone is non-significant (or at least our sample
does not support such an effect). This corresponds to our earlier
observation that the proportion of level tones was very different
forH–B, and rather similar forC–B.
As for syntactic completion, the estimates show significant,
opposite effects forH–B(β: 0.606, SE: 0.181,z: 3.338,
p:<0.001) andC–B(β: -0.955, SE: 0.215,z: -4.445,p:
<0.001), showing that syntactic completion affectsBdiffer-
ently than bothH(for which the log-odds relative toBincrease
when IPUs are incomplete) andC(which portray a decrease).
The estimates for the effect of the high tone and the in-
teraction between the high tone and syntactic completion have
larger values forH–B(β: -0.770 and -0.968) than forC–B
(β: -0.361 and -0.630). Overall, the presence of an IPU-final
high tone increases the log-odds of observingBover eitherH
orC, and appears to do so more strongly forHthan forC.B
thus indeed seems to follow high tones more than eitherHorC,
with a larger distance toH, though we did not separately assess
whether this difference in coefficients is significant.
Finally, to assess whether the effects of the predictors for
Bdiffered more fromHorCoverall, the Jensen-Shannon di-
Table 1:Multinomial mixed regression results
EffectβSE(β)z p
Hold – Backchannel
(Intercept) 0.795 0.172 4.619<0.001
Syn. (inc.) 0.606 0.181 3.338 0.001 ∗∗∗
BT (%) 0.760 0.156 4.878<0.001 ∗∗∗
BT (H%) -0.770 0.115 -6.698<0.001 ∗∗∗
Inc. * % 0.710 0.255 2.786 0.005 ∗∗
Inc. * H% -0.968 0.236 -4.109<0.001 ∗∗∗
Change – Backchannel
(Intercept) 0.970 0.175 5.542<0.001
Syn. (inc.) -0.955 0.215 -4.445<0.001 ∗∗∗
BT (%) 0.045 0.161 0.280 0.779
BT (H%) -0.361 0.119 -3.038 0.002 ∗∗
Inc. * % 0.764 0.292 2.616 0.009 ∗∗
Inc. * H% -0.630 0.282 -2.235 0.025 ∗∗
Note: Inc. = Syntactically incomplete; BT = Boundary tone.
*p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001.
vergence (JSD) was calculated for the predicted probabilities of
the model, using thephilentropylibrary [26, 27, 28]. The diver-
gence betweenHandB(JSD: 0.187) was larger than betweenC
andB(JSD: 0.070), indicating a relatively closer similarity be-
tween the latter two distributions. A non-parametric bootstrap
test indicated that this difference was significant (p<0.001):
the predicted probabilities calculated on the original dataset us-
ing models fitted to 1000 randomly re-sampled datasets consis-
tently yielded a larger deviance forH–Bthan forC–B.
4. Discussion and conclusion
This study has shown that backchannels differ significantly
from turn holds and turn changes in terms of the syntactic
(in)completeness and boundary tones of IPUs preceding them,
and that this difference is larger relative to turn holds than
changes. Backchannels pattern more similarly to changes in be-
ing preceded by fewer level tones. Further, backchannels tend to
follow more complete IPUs than holds but fewer than changes;
they also follow more high tones than the other two categories.
This study may be taken to suggest that backchannels
should be treated as a category separate from both holds and
changes in terms of cues preceding them. Furthermore, the
observation that backchannels pattern relatively more closely
with changes than holds supports the idea that listeners can use
backchannels to return the turn to the initial speaker at moments
when they had an opportunity to take the floor [7].
The level boundary was most strongly associated with turn-
keeping in Caspers’ analysis [10] and was interpreted as high-
lighting syntactic incompletion. These cues were found to be
specifically associated with holds, rather than backchannels, as
backchannels less frequently followed either level tones or in-
complete IPUs than holds. Unlike Caspers we did not consider
intonational cues that become available earlier in the signal,
such as pitch accents. Future research could assess how the
rising pitch accent followed by a level tone, which Caspers [10]
singled out as an independent turn-keeping cue, is distributed
across pre-backchannel and pre-hold contexts.
While Caspers concluded that “high and low boundary
tones are ambig