AuDirector: A Self-Reflective Closed-Loop Framework for Immersive Audio
Storytelling
Yiming Ren ID 1, Ziyang Zhang ID 1,2, Wen Wu ID 1, Baoxiang Li ID 1, Chao Zhang ID 1,2, Xuenan Xu ID 1,∗∗
1 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2 Tsinghua University
{ymr968972,wsntxxn}@gmail.com, cz277@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Despite progress in text and visual generation, coherent long-
form audio storytelling remains challenging. Existing systems of-
ten suffer from mismatches between character settings and voice
performance, weak self-correction, and limited user interaction.
We propose AuDirector, a self-reflective closed-loop multi-agent
framework for audio narrative generation. Its identity-aware
pre-production mechanism converts narratives into character pro-
files and utterance-level emotion instructions, retrieves suitable
voices, and guides expressive speech synthesis. A collaborative
synthesis and correction module audits and regenerates defective
audio via closed-loop self-correction. A human-guided inter-
active refinement module further interprets natural language
feedback to revise scripts interactively. Experiments show that
AuDirector outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in structural
coherence, emotional expressiveness, and acoustic fidelity. Sam-
ples:https://github.com/Riddae/AuDirector.
Index Terms: Audio Generation, Multi-Agent Systems, Self-
Correction, Human-in-the-Loop
1. Introduction
Recent advances in generative modeling have yielded notable
improvements in text generation [ 1, 2] and visual synthesis,
covering both images [3] and videos [4]. As an equally impor-
tant modality, audio plays a critical role in multimedia content
creation, and recent progress in generative models has corre-
spondingly driven rapid developments in audio generation. In
the domain of text-to-speech (TTS), advanced systems can now
perform high-fidelity voice cloning while following fine-grained
emotional and prosodic instructions [5, 6]. Meanwhile, text-to-
audio (TTA) and text-to-music (TTM) models have shown strong
capabilities in generating environmental sound effects [7, 8] and
musical compositions that align closely with the input descrip-
tion [9, 10].
Despite these advances, existing research in audio genera-
tion remains fragmented: most systems operate within a single
domain (e.g., speech, music, or sound effects) and typically
produce only short segments with limited structural coherence.
These limitations constrain the applicability of current audio gen-
eration models to more structured storytelling scenarios, which
inherently require the coherent integration of diverse sound types
over extended durations. This gap highlights the need for sys-
tems capable of holistic audio generation.
To address this gap, recent studies have explored agent-based
audio generation, where LLMs serve as controllers to decom-
pose complex tasks and invoke expert models, as previously
demonstrated by ViperGPT [11] and HuggingGPT [12]. This
**indicates the corresponding author.
paradigm has been extended to audio through systems such as
AudioGPT [13], and further to audio storytelling by WavJour-
ney [14] and PodAgent [15], which generate executable scripts
and integrate multiple audio foundation models to construct
auditory narratives.
Although agent-driven audio storytelling has advanced sig-
nificantly, current frameworks still face several limitations: First,
constrained adaptive speech representation. They typically lack
dynamic voice adaptation and fine-grained emotional control,
leading to a mismatch between the generated speech and the story
context. Second, the absence of a self-correcting quality control.
By ignoring the inherent variability of generative models, these
frameworks fail to detect and selectively regenerate low-quality
clips, compromising the overall output quality. Third, limited
human-in-the-loop collaboration. Operating predominantly in
an open-loop manner, existing systems offer users little to no
capability to refine specific audio elements during generation.
To address these challenges, we proposeAuDirector, a
multi-agent framework that automatically generates high-quality
immersive audio through a closed-loop self-reflection mecha-
nism comprising planning, execution, quality control, and feed-
back. First, we address limited voice adaptation by introducing
Identity-Aware Pre-production. This mechanism extracts charac-
ter profiles and emotional instructions from the narrative to direct
voice retrieval and expression control, ensuring a seamless align-
ment between speech and story context. Second, we establish a
Collaborative Synthesis and Correctionmodule to enable closed-
loop quality control. By auditing audio and triggering targeted
regeneration for defects, this module significantly enhances out-
put stability and fidelity. Third, to mitigate the inflexibility of
open-loop systems, we proposeHuman-Guided Interactive Re-
finement. By interactively refining the underlying script based
on natural language user feedback, the system provides users
with enhanced control over the final output.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as fol-
lows: 1) We propose AuDirector, a self-reflective closed-loop
multi-agent framework facilitating coherent, emotionally ex-
pressive, and long-form audio storytelling across speech, sound
effects, and background music. 2) We establish a collaborative
quality control mechanism that integrates self-correction with
human-computer interaction to enhance generation quality and
support interactive control from users. 3) Experiments demon-
strate that AuDirector achieves superior performance compared
to state-of-the-art (SOTA) baselines in structural coherence, emo-
tional expressiveness, and acoustic fidelity.
2. AuDirector
AuDirectortransforms user prompts Puser (e.g.,“Rain lashes
against the windows of 221B Baker Street, while Sherlock
92
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1180
Figure 1:Overview of the AuDirector framework: 1)Identity-aware pre-productionfor script-driven voice casting; 2)Collaborative
synthesis and correctionfeaturing Critic-led quality auditing and self-correction; and 3)Human-guided interactive refinementfor
precise editing via natural language feedback.
Holmes reveals the truth with cold, analytical precision... ”) into
high-fidelity audio narratives with rich sound effects and back-
ground music, through a collaborative multi-agent architecture
(Figure 1). As formalized in Algorithm 1, the generation pipeline
proceeds through three core stages:
1) Identity-Aware Pre-production:
TheDirector Agent(Adir) andCasting Agent(Acas) col-
laboratively orchestrate emotional script parsing and character
casting.
2) Collaborative Synthesis and Correction:Acoustic Pro-
duction Agent(Aaco) and Critic Agent (Acri) produce and
refine multi-track audio through an iterative auditing loop. The
resulting tracks are then integrated by theMix Agent( Amix) to
produce the initial outputA init.
3) Human-Guided Interactive Refinement: TheInteraction
Agent(Aint) interprets natural language feedback to trigger
targeted regeneration, enabling the Mix Agent to refine the final
audioA f inal.
2.1. Identity-Aware Pre-production
This stage begins withAdir, which leverages an LLM to trans-
form the user prompt Puser into a structured dialogue script
Sdial and character profiles{qid}. This process supports subse-
quent script-driven voice casting and dynamic emotion model-
ing.
Voice Library Construction:To support dynamic voice
selection across varying narrative contexts, we construct an ex-
tensive and highly diversified voice libraryD={(a i,d i)}N
i=1
comprisingN= 320 speech samples. This collection is curated
to cover a broad spectrum of vocal identities, including diverse
ages, genders, and a wide array of acoustic profiles (e.g., varying
dialects and speaking styles). For each audio sampleai, a textual
descriptiondi is generated using Gemini-3-Pro and subsequently
verified by manual inspection to ensure high acoustic quality and
description accuracy.
Runtime Voice Selection:V oice selection follows a “coarse-
to-fine” two-step retrieval process (Lines 2–4 in Algorithm 1):
• Semantic Filtering:Acas utilizes a text embedding module
E(·) to map the character profile qid and candidate descrip-
tions di ∈D into a shared embedding space, filtering the
top-Kcandidates to form a high-recall candidate setS cand.
• Director Decision:Adir determines the optimal voice ak∗
fromScand by considering the dialogue scriptSdial, ensuring
that the selected vocal identity aligns with the emotional and
character requirements of the script.
Context-Driven Emotion Generation.To enhance expres-
siveness and mitigate prosodic monotony, Adir dynamically
synthesizes an emotional profile for each dialogue utterance
Tdial∈S dial. Specifically, by evaluating the surrounding narra-
tive scene contextCscene,Adir translates the inferred affective
intent into an explicit 7-dimensional instruction Iemo ∈R 7.
Formally,Iemo is represented as a weighted mixture over a
predefined emotion basisE:
E=
Anger, Happiness, Fear, Disgust,
Sadness, Surprise, Neutral

.
2.2. Collaborative Synthesis and Correction
This stage ensures high-fidelity audio quality through a nested
“generation-evaluation-refinement” loop (lines 5–22 in Algo-
rithm 1):
Hierarchical Synthesis. Aaco adopts a hierarchical syn-
thesis pipeline. First, conditioned on (Tdial |a k∗,I emo), it
generates the primary speech trackAspeech. Subsequently,Adir
uses the speech timestamp t and the dialogue script Sdial to
build a structured production scriptSprod. The script incorpo-
rates alignment information and ambient sound descriptionsd.
Building upon this, it coordinates the generation of non-voice
tracksAns and provides the foundation forAmix to synthesize
all tracks into the initial audioA init.
Collaborative Correction.To mitigate potential generative
errors, the system employs a closed-loop refinement strategy:
• Speech Loop:Acri first generates an evaluative textual de-
scription of the synthesis quality ofAspeech, and subsequently
provides a corresponding quantitative score based on this as-
sessment. If the score fails to meet the predefined threshold
τspeech,Adir refines the emotion instructionIemo to trigger
regeneration. This process continues for up toNmax attempts,
with the system ultimately preserving the audio sample that
achieves the highest quality score.
• Non-speech Loop:This loop follows the same iterative frame-
work as the speech loop, but the score is evaluated as the
semantic alignment betweenAns and its textual descriptiond.
If the score falls below the thresholdτns, the textual prompt
dor the random seed is adjusted for regeneration.
93
Algorithm 1AuDirector Generation and Refinement
Require:P user,D,{τ speech,τ ns},N max
Ensure:A f inal
I. Identity-Aware Pre-production
1:S dial,{I emo},{q id}←A dir(Puser)
2:foreachq id do
3:a k∗←A dir
 
Sdial,A cas(qid,D,K)

4:end for
II. Collaborative Synthesis & Correction
5:foreachT dial∈S dial do
6:forn= 1...N max do
7:A (n)
speech←A aco(Tdial|a k∗,I emo)
8:score (n)←A cri(A(n)
speech)
9:ifscore (n)≥τ speech then break
10:end for
11:A speech←arg max nscore(n)
12:end for
13:S prod←A dir(Sdial,t speech)
14:foreach non-speech(d,s)∈S prod do
15:form= 1...N max do
16:A (m)
ns ←A aco(d,s)
17:score (m)←A cri(A(m)
ns ,d)
18:ifscore (m)≥τ ns then break
19:end for
20:A ns←arg max mscore(m)
21:end for
22:A init←A mix({Aspeech},{A ns},S prod)
III. Human-Guided Interactive Refinement
23:A f inal←A init
24:whileF user do
25:S upd←A int(Fuser,S prod)
26:A f inal←A mix(TR(S upd),A f inal)
27:end while
28:returnA f inal
2.3. Human-Guided Interactive Refinement
To facilitate direct human intervention, Aint serves as a hu-
man–computer interface by leveraging the reasoning and seman-
tic parsing capabilities of an LLM (Algorithm 1, Lines 23–27).
Upon receiving natural language feedbackFuser (e.g., “lower
the background music volume”),Aint interprets the intent and
precisely modifies the corresponding attributes within the struc-
tured production scriptSprod. Only affected components (e.g.,
a specific sound effect) are regenerated, denoted as Targeted
Regeneration (TR).Amix then updates the mixed trackAf inal
based on the regenerated components. This significantly reduces
computational costs during interactive editing.
3. Experimental Setup
3.1. Implementation Details
AuDirector is a collaborative multi-agent system with Gemini-3-
Pro serving as the Director and Interaction Agents. We utilize
EmbeddingGemma [16] for casting and employ IndexTTS2 [5],
TangoFlux [7], and MusicGen [9] for speech, SFX, and BGM
production, respectively. The Critic Agent leverages MiMo-
Audio [17] and CLAP [ 18] for quality assessment, followed
by pydub for final composition. Detailed system prompts are
provided in our open-source repository.
3.2. Evaluation Data
Our evaluation dataset comprises 100 diverse scenarios catego-
rized into two primary genres: Podcasts (40 topics) and Radio
Dramas (60 stories).
Podcasts:We select a subset from Vicuna [ 19], focusing on
four categories:Generic,Knowledge,Common-sense, andCoun-
terfactual. Each category contains 10 topics aimed at evaluating
multi-turn conversational depth and reasoning.
Radio Dramas:We use 60 narratives from ROCStories [20],
leveraging their strong causal-temporal structure to evaluate the
model’s ability to expand five-sentence premises into complex,
multi-character scripts with rich audio design.
3.3. Evaluation Protocols
3.3.1. Overall Generation Quality
We evaluate AuDirector by comparing it with two baseline sys-
tems:WavJourneyandPodAgent. To ensure a fair comparison
of orchestration capabilities, all systems are driven by the same
LLM and utilize identical underlying audio generation backends
as AuDirector. We also incorporateAuDirector (w/o Critic)to
validate the effectiveness of the self-correction mechanism. The
evaluation is conducted through both objective and subjective
metrics.
Objective Evaluation:We employ automated scoring using
LLMs and pre-trained evaluation models.Voice-Role Match-
ing (VRM): We leverage Gemini-3-Pro to assess the alignment
between the selected voice and the Character Profile generated
byAdir. The model assigns a score on a 1–5 scale (1: poor
match; 5: perfect match) based on key dimensions, including
gender, age, timbre, and delivery style.Audio Aesthetics Score
(AES)[ 21]: This metric provides scores across four aspects:
Production Quality (PQ)for technical fidelity;Production Com-
plexity (PC)for acoustic layering richness;Content Enjoyment
(CE)for artistic appeal; andContent Usefulness (CU)for practi-
cal utility.
Subjective Evaluation:Complementarily, a subjective
Mean Opinion Score (MOS) study involving 10 evaluators as-
sesses perceptual performance. Evaluators provide scores on a
1-5 scale across five dimensions:MOS-Matching (M)for the
consistency between the voice performance and character set-
tings within the story context;MOS-Quality (Q)for general
audio clarity and quality;MOS-Alignment (Ali)for the seman-
tic and temporal alignment of SFX and BGM with the text;
MOS-Emotion (Emo)for prosodic vividness and emotional ex-
pressiveness;MOS-Aesthetic (Aes)for overall artistic appeal and
listening comfort.
3.3.2. Interaction Evaluation
Since human-guided interactive refinement is achieved by modi-
fying corresponding scripts, we evaluate the script modification
accuracy. We curate a set of 200 natural language editing instruc-
tions based on Section 3.2 for evaluation. These instructions are
evenly distributed across four key dimensions:
• 1)Speech Refinement: adjusting vocal attributes or spoken
content, e.g., “make the tone more sorrowful”;
• 2)Acoustic Content Modification: altering non-speech ele-
ments, e.g., “change the rain sound to a storm”;
94
Table 1:Comparison of different methods on Objective and Subjective Metrics. Objective (AES): Production Quality (PQ), Production
Complexity (PC), Content Enjoyment (CE), Content Usefulness (CU), and Voice-Role Matching (VRM). Subjective (MOS): Matching
(M), Quality (Q), Alignment (Ali), Emotion (Emo), Aesthetic (Aes).
Method Objective Metrics Subjective Metrics
CE↑CU↑PC↑PQ↑VRM↑MOS-M↑MOS-Q↑MOS-Ali↑MOS-Emo↑MOS-Aes↑
WavJourney 5.19 5.664.426.95 2.61 3.09±0.67 3.58±0.45 3.30±0.61 3.10±0.52 3.41±0.62
PodAgent 6.377.112.98 7.46 3.59 3.48±0.59 3.73±0.47 3.60±0.54 3.60±0.504.04±0.45
AuDirector (w/o Critic) 6.22 6.52 4.18 7.37 4.234.01±0.343.83±0.44 3.65±0.50 4.00±0.37 3.92±0.46
AuDirector (Full)6.466.98 4.327.59 4.234.00±0.323.86±0.42 3.74±0.44 4.17±0.454.01±0.38
• 3)Signal Gain Control: adjusting volume levels, e.g., “lower
the background music volume”;
• 4)Structural Editing: inserting or deleting audio segments,
e.g., “insert a scream here”.
Performance is assessed viaInstruction Execution Accu-
racy (IEA), where each modification is manually verified for
alignment with the user’s intent.
4. Results and Analysis
4.1. Analysis of Overall Generation Quality
Objective EvaluationAs shown in Table 1, AuDirector leads in
PQ, CE, and VRM. The VRM advantage confirms the effective-
ness of the Casting Agent in achieving precise voice selection
via a “coarse-to-fine” retrieval process. In contrast, baselines
rely on coarse metadata and exhaustive prompt-based selection
by the LLM, which degrades both precision and scalability as
the audio library expands.
Regarding the performance in PC and CU, while WavJour-
ney achieves high PC through diverse audio elements, its poor
coordination results in the lowest scores elsewhere. Conversely,
PodAgent’s fixed format yields high CU at the expense of com-
plexity. Notably, AuDirector ranks second in both dimensions,
striking an optimal balance between acoustic richness and prac-
tical utility through the harmonious integration of speech and
environmental tracks.
Subjective Evaluation.The subjective evaluations shown
on the right side of Table 1 further validate the superiority of
AuDirector. The best performance inMOS-Mreflects the effec-
tiveness of AuDirector in casting and character-role alignment.
The significant improvement inMOS-Emocan be attributed
to the Director Agent’s dynamic emotional instructions, which
effectively enhance vocal expressiveness. In addition, the rela-
tively highMOS-AliandMOS-Aesscores highlight the semantic
alignment and coherence between different audio components
(speech, BGM, and SFX). Notably, since all methods employ a
unified acoustic production backend, the differences inMOS-Q
are not significant, thereby ensuring the fairness of the compari-
son at the agent scheduling level.
Ablation StudyThe comparison between AuDirector and
itsw/o Criticvariant further validates the effectiveness of the
closed-loop self-correction mechanism. Specifically, notable
gains are observed across all metrics exceptMOS-QandMOS-
M. These improvements demonstrate the effectiveness of the
Critic Agent in alleviating inherent generation quality variability
inA aco to improve the final audio quality.
Table 2:Evaluation of Human-Guided Interactive Refinement.
We report the Instruction Execution Accuracy (IEA) across four
categories.
Instruction Category IEA (%)
Signal Gain Control 96.00
Structural Editing 84.00
Speech Refinement 92.00
Acoustic Content Modification 88.00
Overall Average90.00
4.2. Interaction Evaluation
As presented in Table 2, the interactive editing achieves an over-
all IEA of 90.00%. Signal Gain Control and Speech Refinement
demonstrate high accuracy. This is largely due to simple and
explicit positional cues, such as sequential numbers (e.g., “the
3rd dialogue”, “the 2nd BGM”), which help clearly identify the
target. In contrast, Acoustic Content Modification and Struc-
tural Editing exhibit a slight performance drop. These tasks
necessitate more complex and fine-grained temporal localization,
particularly in dense acoustic segments with overlapping SFX.
For instance, distinguishing a specific target within a scene con-
taining overlapping elements (e.g., footsteps mixed with rain)
leads to ambiguity for the agent, thereby increasing the difficulty
of precise script editing.
5. Conclusion
This paper presents AuDirector, a multi-agent framework de-
signed to enhance immersive audio storytelling through closed-
loop collaboration. By integrating identity-aware pre-production
with a self-reflective quality control loop, the framework ensures
that generated audio maintains high-level semantic consistency
with the narrative while granting users fine-grained control over
the final output. Experimental results confirm that AuDirector
significantly improves character-role matching and emotional
expressiveness. However, we observed that current generative
models still have limitations in generating non-speech audio
tracks, especially in terms of acoustic diversity and nuance (e.g.,
smooth breathing versus tense breathing), which can lead to au-
ditory inconsistencies and thus disrupt immersion. Future work
will focus on fine-grained modeling of environmental sounds to
bolster narrative consistency.
95
6. Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Labo-
ratory.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
In this work, generative AI was exclusively utilized to fix gram-
matical mistakes and adjust terminology, while all core research
activities, including study design, data collection, analysis, and
scientific reasoning, were conducted independently by the au-
thors.