On Entrainment in Semi-Spontaneous Multilingual Parliamentary Speech
Jennifer Jane Ries1,∗,∗∗, Debasmita Bhattacharya ID 1,∗, Julia Hirschberg ID 1
1 Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, USA
jr3954@columbia.edu, debasmita.b@cs.columbia.edu, julia@cs.columbia.edu
Abstract
Entrainment has predominantly been studied in monolingual in-
stances of either spontaneous or task-oriented speech, leaving
open questions of how speakers adapt to their interlocutors in
mixed-spontaneity settings where dialogue can also span mul-
tiple languages. Our work studies entrainment in the semi-
spontaneous context of the Hansard French-English parliamen-
tary proceedings. We examine previously unexplored acoustic-
prosodic features of Hansard’s spoken exchanges alongside
their semantic aspects at multiple levels of temporal granularity,
finding that speakers adapt across inter-related dimensions of
entrainment and cross-lingual language settings in accordance
with primacy and recency effects. Our findings give rise to
novel insights into potential planning and priming mechanisms
in an understudied context, motivating further work on the en-
trainment dynamics of linguistically diverse speech settings.
Index Terms: entrainment, multilingual, conversational dy-
namics, speech analysis, multimodal
1. Motivation
Speakers communicate in accordance with a range of conversa-
tional goals, from signaling social identity and fostering rapport
to ensuring mutual comprehension and creating a positive im-
pression. One way to achieve such goals is byentrainingto
one’s interlocutors.Entrainment– also referred to aslinguis-
tic accommodation,alignment, orcoordination– occurs when
speakers subconsciously adapt aspects of their communication
style to match that of their conversation partner. Entrainment
can take place over multiple dimensions and modalities of lan-
guage production including diction and syntax [1], speaking
rate, voice quality, and pause frequency [2, 3, 4], and even facial
expression and gesture [5, 6, 7]. Much prior work has focused
on studying entrainment inspeech; early studies defined met-
rics and statistical frameworks needed to examine this linguistic
phenomenon with respect to lexical, acoustic, prosodic, and se-
mantic features of spontaneous and task-oriented conversation
[8, 3, 9]. Extensions of these studies showed that entrainment is
positively correlated with greater dialogue success and desirable
social outcomes [10, 11] and may be modulated by paralinguis-
tic factors such as interlocutor gender and power differentials
[10, 12, 1]. More recent work on entrainment in speech has in-
corporated machine learning approaches [13, 14] and explored
interactions between its various linguistic dimensions [15, 16].
Despite the breadth of existing work on spoken entrain-
ment, prior studies have predominantly examined monolingual
instances of either spontaneous open-domain speech or special-
ized task-oriented dialogue in extended turn-taking [3, 4]. This
*Equal contribution.
**Corresponding author.
has left open questions of how entrainment occurs in settings
where dialogue involvesvariablelevels of spontaneity, such
as during legal proceedings, and is uttered inmultilingualcon-
texts. A few prior studies considered semi-spontaneous speech
settings but focused entirely on U.S. Supreme Court proceed-
ings [17, 18, 19], limiting their generalizability to languages
other than English as spoken in the United States. Separately,
while some authors have explored multilingual lexical repre-
sentations [20, 21, 22, 23], few have studied spoken multilin-
gual entrainment [24]. The combination of these factors has
left wide scope for exploring how entrainment takes place in
semi-spontaneous and multilingual speech contexts, especially
at the level of single-turn exchanges as in [25, 26, 27, 28]. To
address this gap, we ask the followingRQ:How does a speaker
adapt their communication style with respect to the interlocutor
within a dialogue that involves variable levels of spontaneity
and may require communicating across multiple languages?
To answer thisRQ, we study the Hansard corpus [29]
of Canadian French-English parliamentary speech and exam-
ine downstream entrainment dynamics between long prepared
monologues and shorter spontaneous responses. We find that
1)speakers entrain monolinguallyandcross-lingually in accor-
dance with primacy and recency effects [30];2)these patterns
of entrainment are present in multiple inter-related linguistic di-
mensions; and3)these effects are influenced by both the pres-
ence and the identity of the languages involved in dialogue.
Overall, consistent with entrainment as auniversaldialogue be-
havior, the patterns we find in this linguistically diverse spoken
context mirror many of those originally seen in monolingual
speech settings with fixed levels of spontaneity. Additional tem-
poral effects and interdependence between dimensions of en-
trainment that appear notably in multilingual contextual con-
ditions indicate important ways in which mixed-spontaneity
cross-lingual dialogue may be discursivelyunique. These in
turn have implications for potential planning and priming mech-
anisms underpinning conversational dynamics in both mono-
lingual and multilingual single-turn exchanges, particularly re-
garding the influence of speakers’ memory of prolonged speech.
Our work is the first to study entrainment within the Canadian
Hansard corpus, contributing new insight into the fine-grained
and interactive entrainment dynamics of monolingual and mul-
tilingual dialogue in an underexplored speech setting.
2. Data
We study a subset of the Canadian Hansard corpus of French-
English legislative discourse [29]. Hansard is continually up-
dated with the most recent parliamentary debates, with publicly-
available audio recordings available from September 2006 on.
We focus on Hansard proceedings with available recordings
4522
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2492
from the first session of the 39th Parliament, taking place be-
tween 2006 and 2007.1 This part of Hansard involves 175 cham-
ber meetings of the Canadian parliament and 317 speakers (20
‘Presiding Officer’, 102 ‘Honourable’, and 195 untitled speak-
ers). Transcribed and translated utterances include prepared
speeches and legislative propositions and spontaneous ques-
tions and discussion. The data contain monolingual English,
monolingual French, and code-switched French-English utter-
ances, each annotated with utterance-level language ID tags.
Prior studies leveraged Hansard’s parallel text format for
machine translation applications [32]; our work offers a new
perspective on the dataset’s previously unexplored acoustic-
prosodic aspects. From our subset of Hansard, we exclude turns
containing intrasentential code-switching and randomly sam-
ple 40 dyadic mixed-spontaneity exchanges from the remaining
monolingual data. Each exchange comprises a prepared mono-
logue (10-20 minutes) followed by a spontaneous question (1-2
minutes), totaling over 12 hours of recorded speech and 7,500
utterances. Each monologue-question instance takes one of four
language settings:en-en,fr-fr,en-fr, orfr-en. We ensure bal-
anced subsets of each language setting and remove power differ-
entials between interlocutors by excluding speakers with special
titles, mitigating a known confound of entrainment [12, 1].
3. Method
Our goal is to evaluate how a questioner’s speech entrains to
that of the monologue to which they responded.
Feature extraction.For each exchange, we extract the 88
acoustic-prosodicfeatures in eGeMAPSv02 [33] (spanning F0,
energy, spectral, cepstral, voice quality, and duration measures)
to vectorize both the monologue and the question; we choose
this set for its compact yet cross-lingually representative feature
space [34, 35]. Guided by [36], we obtain an acoustic-prosodic
baseline for the questioner using the features of a monologue
uttered by that speaker in the same language elsewhere in the
corpus; we use it to normalize the monologue and question vec-
tors in the exchange. We also use each exchange’s transcript to
create 1152-dimensionalsemanticrepresentations of the mono-
logue and question using the multilingual encoder RemBERT,2
chosen for its cross-lingually robust embeddings [37].
Quantifying entrainment.For both acoustic-prosodic and
semantic representations, we follow [38, 39, 40] and use co-
sine similarity to measure global entrainment between nor-
malized monologue and question vectors per exchange. We
first obtain null mean entrainment values to capture that the
expected global entrainment between a monologue and non-
corresponding question is near zero [41]. For bothacoustic-
prosodicandsemanticfeature sets, we calculate these null val-
ues foren-en,fr-fr,en-fr, andfr-enusing the cosine similarity
between 5000 random pairings of monologues and questions
from each language setting; we derivep-values by comparing
observed scores against these null values. To avoid assuming
uniform entrainment in each dimension across monologues, we
study fine-grained dynamics by dividing each monologue into
its beginning, middle, and end and repeat the above calculations
to compare each third to the associated question. We obtain
null mean entrainment for each exchange from the mean co-
sine similarity across monologue segments with the subsequent
1Although audio data was retained on the Canadian House of Com-
mons’ website, it was not consolidated with the remainder of the corpus.
To match transcript data with its audio, we manually downloaded and
aligned audio for relevant exchanges using the ParlVU interface [31].
2https://huggingface.co/google/rembert
question. We apply further Pearson correlation testing and lin-
ear mixed-effects modeling usingstatsmodels 0.14.6.
Explaining entrainment.We qualitatively determine
which features contribute the most to entrainment and calculate
the proportion of entrainment each accounts for. We first iden-
tify the top contributor to each dimension of global entrainment
per exchange, resulting in the top-10 global contributors per lan-
guage setting. We quantitatively verify their influence by ablat-
ing them and recalculating global entrainment, as above. We
repeat our qualitative steps at the temporal level by determining
the acoustic-prosodic and semantic features with the greatest
contributions to entrainment between each of the three mono-
logue segments and the question within a given exchange.
4. Results
4.1. Global entrainment mirrors other speech settings
Figure 1:Global acoustic-prosodic (top) and semantic (bottom)
entrainment per exchange. Dotted lines indicate the relevant
statistical significance threshold for each language setting.
We first examine global entrainment of questions to mono-
logues across the four language settings and both dimensions
of entrainment. We find widespreadacoustic-prosodicentrain-
ment (Figure 1; top): 57.5% of exchanges exhibit significant
above-null entrainment (p<0.05) and 20% more approach sig-
nificance (p<0.1). We find similar, but weaker, signs of signif-
icantly non-nullsemanticentrainment on 17.5% of exchanges,
with 10% more approaching significance (Figure 1; bottom);
this validates our method, since questions could in principle be
unrelated to their preceding monologues. The reduction in en-
trainment compared to acoustic-prosodic features is expected:
since monologues are longer and cover more semantic topics,
a question cannot realistically semantically align above inher-
ently high baseline similarity with a monologue in its entirety.
The observed dynamics on each dimension of entrainment
generally mirror those from fixed-spontaneity monolingual set-
tings [3, 16], suggesting that patterns of entrainment from these
spoken contexts may well apply to semi-spontaneous, multilin-
gual settings. While some exchanges entrain more weakly than
others, this remains aligned with prior work, as it is rare for en-
4523
tire corpora to exhibit uniformly strong entrainment across data
points. In contrast, while prior work disagrees on the extent to
which distinct dimensions of entrainment coincide [15, 16], we
find initial indications ofoverlappingacoustic-prosodic and se-
mantic entrainment in highly-entraining exchanges in Hansard.
We investigate a possible relationship between dimensions
of significant global entrainment and whether it differs by lan-
guage setting. Acoustic-prosodic and semantic entrainment are
negativelycorrelated inmonolingualexchanges (r≈ −0.3),
and moderately so inen-enones (r≈ −0.5). In contrast, these
arepositivelycorrelated incross-lingualexchanges (r≈0.3),
and moderately so infr-enones (r≈0.4). While none achieve
statistical significance, the contrast between monolingual and
cross-lingual correlation signs could indicate a potential high-
level coupling between the two dimensions of entrainment that
varies by language setting and warrants further investigation.
4.2. Temporal entrainment exhibits primacy and recency
Since global measures could obscure finer-grained properties,
we next quantify how entrainment in questions develops across
the monologue timescale. Onacoustic-prosodicfeatures, ques-
tioners entrain more strongly to the beginning and end of their
corresponding monologue, relative to the monologue’s middle.
These patterns reflect primacy and recency effects of memory,
where people best recall the first and last items in a series while
forgetting the middle [30], and appear significantly across lan-
guage settings in 82.5% of exchanges. Comparing language set-
tings, primacy and recency are the most pronounced for ques-
tions in English (en-enandfr-enexchanges), suggesting that the
language used in entraining speech, rather than entrained-upon
speech, may characterize temporal alignment patterns.
We find similar primacy and recency ofsemanticentrain-
ment in 67.5% of exchanges, with greater primacy than re-
cency. This may be due to deeper attention to the part of a
monologue where key arguments are typically introduced, as is
required to hold these in memory long enough to align appro-
priately. These semantic effects are most pronounced for ques-
tions in French, complementing the English-specific patterns of
the strongest temporal entrainment over acoustic-prosodic fea-
tures. These temporal trends across dimensions of entrainment
broadly align with our global observations and reveal continued
mirroring of acoustic-prosodic and semantic entrainment, even
at a more granular level of temporal analysis.
Given subtle differences in our temporal findings so far, we
begin a deeper study of how dimensions of entrainment interact:
we first hypothesize that generally,semanticentrainment has
strongerprimacyeffects whileacoustic-prosodicentrainment
has strongerrecencyeffects. To test this, we fit a mixed effects
model,3 calculating estimated marginal means and planned con-
trasts on the interaction between entrainment dimensions (se-
mantic vs. acoustic-prosodic) and monologue temporal seg-
ments (initial vs. final). We find no evidence of general seman-
tic primacy, nor general acoustic-prosodic recency (β= 0.003
andp >0.05for both), and observe null interaction between
entrainment dimensions and segment locations (β= 0.005,
p >0.05), indicating that temporal profiles of semantic and
acoustic-prosodic entrainment do not generally differ this way.
Despite the null interaction between acoustic-prosodic and
semantic temporal entrainment, we revisit their opposing global
correlations in different language settings, and now hypothesize
that temporal asymmetries between dimensions of entrainment
3Entrainment∼FeatureType * SegmentLocation + LanguageSet-
ting, with a random intercept for each exchange.
only surface under specific cross-lingual constraints. We test
this using a mixed effects model (Table 1) and assess whether
a question’s semantic entrainment with its monologue’s ini-
tial segment predicts its acoustic-prosodic entrainment with that
monologue’s final segment in cross-lingual exchanges.
Table 1:Summary of mixed effects model: FinalAcoustic∼Ini-
tialSemantic * LanguageSetting. FinalAcoustic and InitialSe-
mantic (IS) represent the entrainment score between a ques-
tion and the final and initial segments of its paired mono-
logue, respectively. LanguageSetting (LS) categorically en-
codes whether a given exchange is monolingual (coded 0) or
cross-lingual (coded 1). Bolded features are significant.
Factor coef std err z P>|z|
Intercept 2.276 1.254 1.816 0.069
IS -1.898 1.344 -1.412 0.158
LS -2.4510.718 -3.4140.001
IS * LS 2.8120.578 4.8620.000
We find that the relationship between initial semantic and fi-
nal acoustic-prosodic entrainment is significantly more positive
in cross-lingual exchanges than in monolingual ones (Table 1;
interaction effect). Whileen-frandfr-enexchanges exhibit
lower entrainment overall (Figure 1), within these exchanges,
a questioner who entrains semantically to a monologue’s open-
ing is significantly more likely to also align acoustically with its
close. In monolingual exchanges, initial semantic entrainment
has the opposite relationship with final acoustic-prosodic en-
trainment, exhibiting a weak trade-off between the two dimen-
sions. This contextualinterdependencebetween dimensions of
entrainment may reflect alignment that occurs in stages; the
strong association between initial semantic and final acoustic-
prosodic entrainment suggests that speakers first align to mono-
logues semantically to plan a question’scontent, and only scaf-
fold its acoustic-prosodicformimmediately before producing it.
This particularly applies to speakers who may face greater cog-
nitive constraints for achievingcross-lingualentrainment com-
pared to monolingual cases. These language-setting-dependent
patterns are consistent with those at the global level, enhancing
our finer-grained understanding of interacting acoustic-prosodic
and semantic entrainment in Hansard and pointing to a two-
stage planning mechanism unique to cross-lingual dialogue.
4.3. A minority of features drives a majority of entrainment
We now interpret the factors driving such global and tempo-
ral entrainment. While we note someacoustic-prosodicpat-
terns that hold across language settings – e.g., all F0 aspects
(mean, range, etc.) recur as high-impact features in all cases –
the top contributors to global entrainment seem to depend on
the language setting of a given exchange and the specific lan-
guages present. In exchanges involving English, Mel-frequency
cepstral coefficient (MFCC) features recur as top contribu-
tors to global entrainment, accounting for up to 26% acoustic-
prosodically. In exchanges involving French, loudness features,
e.g., its standard deviation, consistently contribute the most, ac-
counting for up to 8% of global entrainment. Also, individual
acoustic-prosodic features, rather than cohesive feature groups,
contribute more to entrainment in cross-lingual than in mono-
lingual exchanges, as the mean top feature contribution is 11%
vs. 6% globally. This reveals another difference in entrainment
style over different language settings. Temporal analyses of
feature contributions reinforce global patterns, as the highest-
4524
contributing global acoustic-prosodic features exhibit similar
importance across temporal segments under matching language
setting constraints. Overall, percentage contributions are dis-
proportionately high relative to acoustic-prosodic feature count.
Semanticentrainment exhibits similar patterns, both across
and within language settings. The highest-impact embedding
index is consistent over language settings and global and tem-
poral comparisons, activating tokens dealing with public policy
and legislative decisions such as ‘illégaux’, ‘l’administration’,
and ‘non-partisan’, i.e., the core topics in Hansard. Other high-
impact global and temporal contributors include an index acti-
vated by numerical concepts (‘third’, ‘5,000’, ‘milliers’), which
drives 3-6% of temporal entrainment across language settings,
and an index activating direct address-related tokens (‘Mon-
sieur’, ‘Honourable’, ‘Speaker’) that accounts for 2-4% of tem-
poral entrainment across language settings. Percentage contri-
butions here are disproportionately even higher given the larger
semantic feature space. Strikingly, although all exchanges
across language settings share the same highest-impact index,
this too exhibits significant language-specific patterns: its con-
tribution to global entrainment is higher inen-enexchanges
(25% of such entrainment) than infr-frones (16%), and is in-
termediate for cross-lingual exchanges (19% ofen-frandfr-en
entrainment). This reflects a relatively stronger influence on se-
mantic entrainment involving English, which also replicates for
the following two highest-impact semantic factors.
Figure 2:Global acoustic-prosodic (top) and semantic (bottom)
entrainment per exchange. Hatched bars represent entrainment
following ablation of the highest-impact features in each case.
Figure 2 demonstrates the impact of the primary drivers
of global entrainment in each dimension: in their absence, en-
trainment decreases by up to 75% acoustic-prosodically and up
to 24% semantically. These correspond to mean reductions of
14% and 12% across each dimension of entrainment, respec-
tively; the latter is strongly significant on semantic features. We
also observe that reductions in entrainment from removing the
highest-impact features are consistently greater in cross-lingual
exchanges. Absent the top contributors, acoustic-prosodic en-
trainment decreases by 29% and 18% infr-enanden-frex-
changes, compared to 6% and 10% inen-enandfr-frones. Sim-
ilarly, the absence of top contributors reduces semantic entrain-
ment by 24% and 22% infr-enanden-frexchanges, compared
to 5% and 2% inen-enandfr-frones. So, the strongest drivers
of entrainment have greater impact on cross-lingual exchanges.
Overall, we identify the features determininghowentrainment
occurs in each dimension in Hansard, showing their consistency
over both global and temporal levels of qualitative analysis, and
with respect to revealing language-setting-dependent patterns.
5. Discussion
We explore an understudied semi-spontaneous and multilingual
speech setting, uncovering insights into its unique entrainment
dynamics. Our global entrainment results mirror prior work
on fixed-spontaneity monolingual contexts. Our temporal ap-
proach reveals new primacy and recency effects with contextual
interdependency between dimensions of finer-grained entrain-
ment in this setting; this suggests selective priming over time
by different dimensions of entrainment, shaping the entrained
production of higher-spontaneity responses to prepared speech.
Such two-staged entrainment implies the priming of semantic
content is a slower and more deliberate process that draws on
earlier and more memorable speech, relative to faster and more
reflexive acoustic-prosodic priming that may be triggered by re-
cent auditory exposure. Such inter-relatedness in the underlying
planning mechanism of entrainment has not been clearly shown
in speech settings with fixed spontaneity, where authors dis-
agree on the extent to which dimensions of global entrainment
interact [15, 16]. Our temporal approach instead addresses the
fine-grained, multidimensional aspects of prolonged interlocu-
tor speech that a speaker must recall well enough to entrain,
proposing a cognitive perspective that complements prior work
on both the social motivators of entrainment [10] and its con-
nections to memory and priming [28].
We also offer a fresh multilingual perspective. First, our
proposed multidimensional planning mechanism emerges only
in cross-lingual exchanges. We speculate that monolingual di-
alogue offers an advantage where priming can occursimulta-
neouslyacross entrainmen