OnDA: On-device Channel Pruning for Efficient Personalized Keyword
Spotting
Matteo Risso1, Alessio Burrello1,∗∗, Daniele Jahier Pagliari1
1 Politecnico di Torino, Italy
matteo.risso@polito.it, alessio.burrello@polito.it, daniele.jahier@polito.it
Abstract
Always-on keyword spotting (KWS) demandson-device adap-
tationto cope with user- and environment-specific distribu-
tion shifts under tight latency and energy budgets. This pa-
per proposes, for the first time, couplingweightadaptation
(i.e., on-device training) witharchitecturaladaptation, in the
form of online structured channel pruning, for personalized
on-device KWS. Starting from a state-of-the-art self-learning
personalized KWS pipeline, we compare data-agnostic and
data-aware pruning criteria applied on in-field pseudo-labelled
user data. On the HeySnips and HeySnapdragon datasets,
we achieve up to 9.63×model-size compression with respect
to unpruned baselines at iso-task performance, measured as
the accuracy at 0.5 false alarms per hour. When deploy-
ing our adaptation pipeline on a Jetson Orin Nano embed-
ded GPU, we achieve up to 1.52×/1.57×and 1.64×/1.77×
latency and energy-consumption improvements during online
training/inference compared to weights-only adaptation.
Index Terms: keyword spotting, on-device learning, personal-
ization, structured pruning, embedded deployment
1. Introduction
Keyword spotting (KWS) represents a key building block for
always-on voice interfaces, enabling wake-word and command
detection under continuous audio streams [1]. In practical de-
ployment scenarios, KWS systems face different challenges
such as (i) dealing with keywords not seen during training [2],
(ii) large inter-speaker variability [3], (iii) domain shift from
training to in-field acoustic conditions [4], and (iv) stringent
on-device constraints on memory, compute, and energy [3, 4].
These challenges motivate the development of personalized and
adaptive KWS methods that can improve in the target domain
after deployment, without relying on large labeled datasets.
Recent work has studied on-device self-learning for person-
alized KWS on ultra-low-power sensors by combining pseudo-
labeling with incremental gradient-based fine-tuning [3]. How-
ever, we argue that the efficiency of personalized KWS can be
significantly improved by adapting online not only theweights
of a Deep Neural Network (DNN), but also itsarchitecture.
Classically, DNN architecture optimizations (in the form of
pruning, neural architecture search, etc.) are treated as offline,
pre-deployment steps [5, 6]. Intuitively, however, the same dis-
tribution shifts that make on-device fine-tuning beneficial may
also influence well-performing architectures. For instance, a
more or less aggressively pruned model might be needed to
reach a certain accuracy, depending on the target keyword, the
speaker’s voice, the acoustic conditions, etc.
**indicates the corresponding author.
In this paper, we therefore investigate On-device Adapta-
tion (OnDA) pipelines that employ structured channel prun-
ingonlineto complement weights adaptation. We select struc-
tured pruning for its effectiveness and compatibility with train-
ing/inference infrastructure, but OnDA’s core principles are ex-
tensible to other forms of compression.
Through experiments with data-agnostic and data-aware
pruning methods applied at different stages of the adaptation
pipeline, we demonstrate that optimizing the architecture us-
ing in-distribution data is generally superior to offline alterna-
tives. This confirms the above intuition, which is non-trivial
given the trade-offs between data quality and quantity. In fact,
while the OnDA approach uses data that more closely match the
in-field distribution, it consequently has access tosignificantly
fewer samplesfor post-pruning fine-tuning, which also relies
onpseudo-labelsrather than hard ground truths. We summarize
our main contributions as follows:
• We formulate and evaluate multiple edge-deployment
pipelines that combine offline pretraining, structured prun-
ing (offline/online, data-agnostic/data-aware), and on-device
self-learning adaptation.
• We report Pareto frontiers for accuracy with False Alarm
Rate (FARh)= 0.5false alarms/hour versus model size
on the HeySnips and HeySnapdragon datasets, using the
ResNet15 and DS-CNN-L from [3] as baseline architectures.
We achieve up to 3.33×and 9.63×model compression at
iso-task performance with those baselines, while also show-
ing that pruning with domain data is more effective than di-
rectly fine-tuning a smaller (offline-pruned) network.
• We provide NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano latency and en-
ergy measurements, achieving up to 1.57×/1.93×lower in-
ference latency, and 1.77×/2.07×lower inference energy-
consumption at iso-task performance compared to the base-
line DNNs of [3] on GPU and CPU, respectively. Analyzing
these results, we further conclude that data-aware pruning of-
fers superior advantages over data-agnostic alternatives, as it
can be appliedat the startof the adaptation phase, thereby
reducing the cost of subsequent fine-tuning (and inference).
The OnDA code is released as open source at:https://
github.com/eml-eda/onda.
2. Background and Related Work
On-Device Learning and Personalization for KWS:On-
device personalization aims to adapt a keyword detector to
a target user and/or acoustic environment, often with only a
few labelled samples. ProtoNet formulations [7] (detailed in
Sec. 3.1) are common in few-shot and open-set KWS [8, 9, 2].
The work of [3] proposes a self-learning pipeline for user-
4072
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1253
B1: Pre-Training B2: Calibration + 
Pseudo-Labelling
B3: On-Device 
Training
Final 
Model
Offline
 Online
P: Offline Pruning + 
Fine-Tuning O1: Online Pruning O2: Online Pruning + 
Repeat B3 
OnDA-1:B1 (P) B2 O1 B3 OnDA-2:B1 (P) B2 O2B3
Figure 1: BASELINEandONDApipelines steps.
specific personalization in an open-set scenario where the per-
sonalized keyword belongs to a previously unseen class (i.e.,
not observed during pretraining). A pretrained ProtoNet ar-
chitecture is employed to pseudo-label incoming utterances
based on embedding similarity with a few user-provided sam-
ples. Finally, the pseudo-labelled dataset is used to perform
on-device gradient-based fine-tuning. An orthogonal direction
is to adapt the model to the acoustic domain rather than to a spe-
cific user/keyword. For instance, [4] studied on-device domain
learning for KWS under changing ambient noise conditions on
low-power extreme-edge systems.
Pruning and Model Optimization for Edge KWS:
Efficiency for KWS has been pursued through compact archi-
tectures (e.g., CNN/DS-CNN/ResNet variants) [10, 11, 12, 13],
quantization [14], pruning [15], and hardware-aware neural
architecture search [16, 17]. Hessian-based pruning has
shown strong results across a range of tasks [6], yet remains
under-explored for KWS. In particular, Hessian-based criteria
are a promising direction, especially in low-data regimes
where data-efficient importance estimates are desirable [6].
Hessian-Aware Pruning (HAP) is a representative approach
that proposes channel-wise pruning based on a Hessian-
trace-weighted magnitude score computed efficiently via
Hutchinson’s trace estimation [6]. Nonetheless, pruning and
architectural optimization in general have been applied only
in an offline (pre-deployment) setting. In contrast, OnDA
leveragesin-field user datato compute pruning scores and
investigates pruning to reduce the cost of both on-device
fine-tuning and inference in personalized KWS.
3. Methods
The top of Fig. 1 (B1, B2, and B3) summarizes the self-
learning KWS pipeline from [3] that we take as baseline, which
is summarized in Sec. 3.1. On the bottom, P represents a “clas-
sic” offline pruning, whereas O1 and O2 are the additional on-
line pruning steps proposed in our work. We describe OnDA
pipelines in Sec. 3.2, and detail the pruning strategies that we
select to realize them in Sec. 3.3.
3.1. Baseline self-learning pipeline
We follow the self-learning protocol of [3]. Letf θ :X →Rd
denote a so-called ProtoNet DNN [7], mapping an input audio
segmentx∈Xto an embeddingz=f θ(x).
The initial step of the pipeline (B1) deals with the offline
pretraining offθ. Given a labeled multi-class and multi-speaker
datasetD pre ={(x i,yi)}N
i=1 with labelsy i ∈ {1,...,K},
fθ is pretrained using the triplet loss of Eq. 1. Each triplet
is built by sampling fromD pre two positive samples sharing
the same class, and one negative from a different class, i.e.,
(xp1,xp2,xn)such thaty p1 =y p2̸=y n. Letz p1 =f θ(xp1),
zp2 =f θ(xp2), andz n =f θ(xn). The loss for a single triplet
is computed as:
Ltri(θ) = max

∥zp1−zp2∥2
2−∥zp1−zn∥2
2 +α,0

(1)
whereα>0is the margin hyper-parameter.
Then, the pretrained networkf θ is deployed on the target
platform and the calibration and pseudo-labelling phase (B2) is
executed. During this phase, a user not present in the training
set provides a small labelled set ofMpositive examples of an
unseen keyword (i.e., a class not present inD pre), denoted as
E={x +
j}M
j=1. A keyword prototype is computed as:
p= 1
M
MX
j=1
fθ(x+
j ).(2)
Next, incoming audio segmentsxare pseudo-labelled by
computing the Euclidean distanced(x) =∥f θ(x)−p∥ 2 and
comparing it with two thresholdsγ + < γ−. The segment is
pesudo-labelled as positive ifd(x)≤γ + and as negative if
d(x)≥γ −; samples withinγ + < d(x)< γ− are discarded.
The thresholds are calibrated following [3]. Pseudo-labeled au-
dio segments yield the setD ft ={(x t,˜yt)}.
Finally, we perform on-device training (B3) by fine-tuning
the embedding networkfθ using the same triplet-loss objective
of Eq. (1), forming triplets by sampling pseudo-labelled posi-
tives and negatives fromD ft.
3.2. OnDA pipelines
LetAbe the network architecture (i.e., a choice of chan-
nels per layer) for the embedding networkf θ. We denote by
A′ =P (·)
ρ (A;B)a structured channel-pruning operator that
transformsAinto a pruned architectureA ′ at a pruning ratioρ.
The operator may bedata-awareand use a batchBof available
data (fromD pre orD ft) ordata-agnostic(ignoreB). The super-
script(·)indicates that different pruning criteria can be used, as
detailed in Sec. 3.3.
On top of the BASELINEdescribed in Sec. 3.1, we identify
three “moments” at which pruning (and consequent fine-tuning)
can be applied, depicted in Fig. 1 as P, O1, and O2. P is a stan-
dard offline pruning that uses pretraining dataDpre for deciding
what to prune (when data-aware) and for fine-tuning the pruned
model. In contrast, O1 and O2 are the twoonlinepruning op-
tions proposed in this work. In these cases, data-aware criteria
and fine-tuning usepseudo-labeled datafromD ft.
Online pruning can be applied eitherbefore(O1) or
after(O2) weights adaptation (i.e., B3). O2 is the necessary
approach for data-agnostic criteria, which decide what to prune
not based on input data and corresponding predictions, but
rather on weight statistics (e.g., channel norms). Thus, before
pruning, such statistics should be updated to reflect the result
of in-domain learning, so that the pruning process can retain
parts of the DNN that are “important” for the context in which
it is deployed. Clearly, in this setting, the network must be
fine-tuned again after pruning, to compensate for accuracy
drops, hence B3 must be repeated. In contrast, data-aware
criteria, although usually more computationally expensive,
can also be appliedpriorto fine-tuning (O1), at the start of
the adaptation process, since they prune based on the loss
landscape produced by (in-domain) data.
Importantly, both O1 and O2 areorthogonalto P, i.e., they
can be applied either directly to unpruned baseline DNNs, or to
networks that already underwent an initial offline compression
step, using pre-training data (Dpre).
We refer to the complete pipelines obtained by inserting O1
or O2 at the specified positions into the BASELINEsequence
of steps (Sec. 3.1) as ONDA-1 and ONDA-2 respectively, as
depicted in the bottom part of Fig. 1.
4073
0 50k 100k 150k 200k 250k 300k 350k 400k 450k 500k
75
80
85
90
95Acc. w/ FARh=0.5 (%) HeySnips
0 50k 100k 150k 200k 250k 300k 350k 400k 450k 500k
70
75
80
85
90
95
HeySnapdragon
Model Size (parameters)
Pareto frontier Baseline ResNet15 DSCNN-L DSCNN-M DSCNN-S
Offline PR : 0.0 0.25 0.50 Pipeline : OnDA-1 OnDA-2
Figure 2:Pareto fronts for personalized KWS under different OnDA pipelines compared with baseline [3].
By comparing both approaches, we address the follow-
ing non-trivial research question:“Is it preferable to apply
in-domain-data-aware pruning prior to fine-tuning, or data-
unaware pruning after an initial fine-tuning phase?”
3.3. Pruning strategies
As anticipated, we consider structured pruning of the convo-
lutional layer’s output channels. We select this compression
technique due to its compatibility with commodity infrastruc-
ture: the pruned models are essentially dense sub-architectures
with fewer channels, hence training and inference speedups and
energy savings are easy to achieve. In contrast, pruning at the
level of individual weights or smaller blocks requires dedicated
runtimes and/or hardware support to translate into practical ef-
ficiency gains [18]. However, in principle, OnDA can also be
applied with unstructured or semi-structured pruning, for hard-
ware platforms supporting them.
Given a layer with output channelsc∈{1,...,C}, prun-
ing removes entire activation channels, and the corresponding
weights in subsequent layers. Each layer can have a different
number of pruned channels, and we apply pruning criteria glob-
ally. That is, all channels in the DNN are scored jointly by an
“importance” metric, and the least important ones are removed
until reaching a target pruning ratioρ, computed as the ratio
between the total weights of the pruned model and those of the
unpruned DNN. We consider two pruning schemes.
Data-agnostic pruning (global L1):As data-agnostic
method, we applymagnitude-basedpruning by scoring each
channelcwith the L1-norm of the weights associated with it
as in [5]. Concretely, lettingWc denote the kernel slice produc-
ing output channelc, we define the channel score as:
sL1
c =∥W c∥1,(3)
where∥W c∥1 =P
i|(Wc)i|denotes the sum of absolute val-
ues over all scalar entries ofW c. We prune the channels with
the smallest scores [5]. We consider this pruning scheme with
the ONDA-2 pipeline.
Data-aware pruning (HAP):As data-aware method,
we implement Hessian-Aware Pruning (HAP) [6]. While
magnitude-based criteria ignore how pruning a channel affects
the task loss, second-order sensitivity metrics, like HAP, exploit
the available data to estimate the local curvature of the loss land-
scape. Channels whose removal is expected to induce a larger
second-order increase in the loss are deemed more important,
which is particularly appealing in our low-data setting. HAP
uses a block-diagonal, trace-based approximation of the Hes-
sianH c for the group of weights within channelc, i.e.,W c.
Namely, the HAP channel score is proportional to the average
Hessian trace scaled by its squared L2-norm and normalized by
nc, i.e., the total number of parameters inWc:
sHAP
c =

T r(Hc)
nc

∥Wc∥2
2.(4)
Tr(Hc)can be efficiently estimated using Hutchinson’s
method, which computes the application of the Hessian to a
random input vector with a computational cost analogous to
backpropagating the gradient [6]. We apply HAP pruning in
the ONDA-1 pipeline and for offline pruning (P).
4. Experimental Results
4.1. Setup
We follow the experimental protocol of [3] and refer the readers
to it for further details. We pretrain on the large-scale MSWC
[19] dataset (Dpre) and evaluate baseline and OnDA pipelines
on HeySnips [12] and HeySnapdragon [20], by splitting data
into anadaptation set, used to build the pseudo-labeled setD ft
and a disjointtest set, used only for evaluation before/after self-
learning and model adaptation. We consider the same subjects
as [3], and apply each pipeline independently to each subject.
We report cross-subject average results. Differently from [3],
we repeat all experiments with three different random seeds.
When shown, error bars indicate the minimum and maximum
across seeds, with the marker denoting the seed-averaged value.
We consider all the models reported in [3] as baselines. We
apply OnDA to the two largest and best performing architec-
tures, ResNet15 [11] and DS-CNN-L [10], and to offline pruned
versions of those models with pruning ratios (ρ) 25% and 50%.
We keep the same training/adaptation hyperparameters unless
stated otherwise. For each baseline and offline-pruned DNN,
we then apply online pruning with ratios 25%, 50% and 75%.
4.2. OnDA Search Space Exploration
Fig. 2 shows the task-performance versus model size trade-off
obtained by the baseline and OnDA pipelines. The x-axis re-
ports the model size, while the y-axis reports the accuracy at
FARh = 0.5, i.e., the same task-performance metric of [3].
Different colors denote different architecture families from [3],
with the corresponding baseline points connected by a yellow
dashed line. Different marker shapes indicate different offline
pruning ratios, while marker patterns denote the pipeline: no
pattern corresponds to ONDA-1, while crosses correspond to
ONDA-2. Offline pruned DNNs that are not further compressed
online are shown with dashed-edge markers. Lastly, non Pareto-
optimal models are shown with transparency.
4074
0s 93s 00 2500 5000
5
10
Power (W)
Adaptation Stdby Inference
Pruning Adaptation Stdby Inference
(a) OnDA-1 - Power
Baseline
OnDA-1
0s 157s 00 2500 5000
5
10 Adaptation Stdby Inference
Adaptation Prune+Adapt Stdby Inference
(b) OnDA-2 - Power
Baseline
OnDA-2
0s 93s 00 2500 5000
Time (s)                    N. Inferences
0
50
Energy Saved (J)
(c) OnDA-1 - Energy Saved
0s 157s 00 2500 5000
Time (s)                    N. Inferences
500
0
(d) OnDA-2 - Energy Saved
Figure 3:On-device latency measurements on Jetson Orin Nano for GPU and CPU deployment.
Table 1:Deployment relative gains on Jetson Orin Nano com-
pute units. Improvements are reported with respect to [3].
Compute unit OnDA pipeline Adapt. Lat./En. Inf. Lat./En.
GPUONDA-1 1.52×/1.64×1.57×/1.77×
GPUONDA-2 1.29×/1.36×1.91×/2.55×
CPUONDA-1 1.86×/1.94×1.93×/2.07×
CPUONDA-2 1.8×/1.87×2.34×/2.53×
The results of Fig. 2 show that both OnDA pipelines pro-
duce solutions that improve the accuracy versus size trade-off
with respect to the baselines, and to DNNs that are only pruned
offline, especially in the small size regions of the planes. We
also observe that most of the Pareto-optimal points originate
from the ResNet family (orange baseline), suggesting that start-
ing from a larger DNN provides greater flexibility during the
subsequent pruning/adaptation optimization.
For HeySnips (left pane), at iso performance with the
most accurate baseline (ResNet15), our best OnDA configu-
ration (second orange triangle from the right) achieves3.33×
compression; moreover, the highest iso-performance compres-
sion is achieved with respect to the DS-CNN-L baseline, with
the second orange square from the left being both9.63×
smaller and more accurate. Considering HeySnapdragon, at
iso-performance with ResNet15 baseline, the best compression
achieved by our OnDA configurations is1.7×(second orange
circle from the right).
Overall, from the perspective of accuracy versus model
size, none of the two OnDA pipelines outperforms the other,
with both producing multiple Pareto-optimal solutions. There-
fore, the choice between them boils down to their deployment
costs, as analysed in the next section.
4.3. Deployment on Jetson Orin Nano
We deploy OnDA pipelines on the NVIDIA Jetson Orin
Nano [21], which integrates both a GPU and a multi-core CPU.
We report latency and energy results on both compute units.
Power is measured using the on-board current sensor, which
provides the System-on-Chip (SoC) current draw.
We analyze deployment metrics for the two circled points
from the left panel of Fig. 2, which are those achieving the best
compression at iso-performance compared to the most accurate
baseline. Moreover, the two points are very similar in terms of
accuracy and model size, but one is produced by ONDA-1 and
the other by ONDA-2.
Fig. 3 reports the measured power traces and the resulting
energy deltas with respect to the baseline of [3] when deploy-
ing on the Jetson’s GPU. Across all configurations, we keep
the same hyperparameters and total training epochs; thus, any
change in the duration/power of each fine-tuning/inference step
is solely due to architectural differences induced by pruning.
In the top panels (a) and (b), the x-axis shows the successive
phases of the OnDA pipeline with duration in seconds, followed
by a standby phase and then an arbitrary number of inferences
nrepresenting normal always-on usage of the adapted model
(we report results as a function ofnrather than wall-clock time
since, in practice, KWS inference can be skipped when the input
audio signal energy falls below a threshold). The y-axis reports
the measured power consumption in watts. In the bottom panels
(c) and (d), the x-axis again reports time/number of inferences,
while the y-axis shows the energy difference∆Ebetween the
baseline and the considered OnDA pipeline (shown in green
when positive and in red when negative). Tab. 1 summarizes the
relative improvements in terms of single inference/fine-tuning
step latency and energy for the two pipelines with respect to the
[3] baseline, both on GPU (visualized in Fig. 3) and on CPU
(not shown for sake of space but exhibiting a similar trend).
An interesting result emerges: although the two pipelines
produce similar output models, ONDA-1 is drastically faster
and more energy efficient when deployed. While HAP prun-
ing is more expensive than L1 in isolation, applying it at the
start of the adaptation phasemakes the model smallerduring
the subsequent fine-tuning, which in turn becomes faster and
draws less power than the baseline. As a result, after a short ini-
tial phase with negative∆E, ONDA-1 rapidly becomes more
energy efficient than the baseline thanks to a shorter adapta-
tion time and a shorter inference time. This behaviour is not
observed for ONDA-2, where the second adaptation step intro-
duces a substantial energy overhead that delays the break-even
point to more than10 5 inferences. Therefore, we conclude that
pre-fine-tuning, data-aware online pruning, is the preferable ap-
proach in this scenario.
5. Conclusions
We propose OnDA, an online self-learning pipeline for per-
sonalized on-device keyword spotting that combines one-shot
data-aware pruning with on-device model adaptation. Across
HeySnips and HeySnapdragon, OnDA yields Pareto-optimal
compressed models that preserve accuracy with FAR h = 0.5
while reducing adaptation and inference latency on Jetson Orin
Nano by up to 1.52×/1.57×.
4075
6. Generative AI Usage Disclosure
The authors used generative AI tools solely to proofread and
polish the manuscript.
7. Acknowledgement
This work has been partially funded by the NEURAL research
project, realized with the contibution of Fondazione Compagnia
di San Paolo.