Sexualised synthetic personas encode and amplify gendered power
asymmetries through voice
Alice Ross ID 1,∗,∗∗, Ariadna Sanchez ID 1,∗,∗∗, Elin Kanhov2, Catherine Lai1, ´Eva Sz´ekely2
1 University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
2 KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
alice.ross@ed.ac.uk, ariadna.sanchez@ed.ac.uk
Abstract
This work examines sexualised AI-generated English-speaking
voices offered by a popular commercial platform. New tech-
nologies may enable sexual empowerment and greater diver-
sity in gender expression, yet toxic masculinity, heteronorma-
tivity, and the abuse of women and LGBTQ+ people remain
pervasive online. Drawing on a Feminist HCI perspective, we
examine how commercial voice AI systems reproduce and cir-
culate particular performances of gender. We conducted a lis-
tening experiment with a diverse group of listeners, combining
quantitative adjective selection, qualitative free-text responses,
and acoustic analysis. Participants evaluated male- and female-
coded voices presented with either sexualised scripts or neutral
text. Results reveal a narrow range of gender expression, largely
binary and heteronormative. Female-coded voices are more fre-
quently described using sexualised and submissive terms, while
male-coded voices are more often associated with dominance
and positive traits.
Index Terms: text-to-speech, voice AI, gender representation,
feminist HCI, speech perception
1. Introduction
The internet and novel technologies can provide supportive
spaces for marginalised people to create connections and per-
form identity. While they can offer opportunities for women’s
sexual empowerment [1, 2], or for queer and trans people to
experiment with sexuality and gender (e.g., [3, 4]), harassment
and victimisation of these groups persist as common features
of internet discourse [5, 6]. Concurrently, text-to-speech (TTS)
(also recently called ‘V oice AI’) has been subjected to gender-
ing and social perceptions. Humans make social judgments
about the appearance, characteristics and personality traits of
the imagined ‘speakers’ behind TTS voices [7, 8, 9]. For this
reason, in the 2010s, the characterisation of early voice assis-
tants (V As) like Alexa and Siri as ‘female by default’, conform-
ing to a stereotypical ‘secretary’ persona, rightly drew criticism
in academic and popular press [10, 11, 12]. Now, we turn our
attention to a newer arena and find evidence that some of the
same outdated roles may persist. The important difference is in
the nature of the product: the promise of voice assistants was
to reduce friction in user interactions with existing functions
(e.g., setting alarms) while in commercial voice AI platforms,
the human-like generated voice itself is offered for sale. Users
are encouraged to play Pygmalion, prompting and personalising
the TTS output to their precise specifications and then telling it
what to say, with the option of adding embodied paralinguistic
features like giggles and sighs.
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
In 2025 (still visible via the internet archive), the TTS sec-
tion of ElevenLabs’ website presented various categories of
‘emotional’ TTS voices, with the top three includingseductive
andsultry. These categories contained lists of voices, almost
always clearly coded as female and with feminine names (e.g.,
Natasha). These categories still exist, but their links are now
less prominent on the home page and several are now popu-
lated by prompt-generated voices with generic names like ‘The
midnight enchantress’. The categoriesflirty,attractive,submis-
sive, etc, contain a list of these personas with editable prompts
and sample audio, evenly split (2+2) between male and female
coded (we encountered one gender neutral voice in our initial
exploration, representing an androgynous, ageless being: ‘The
abyssal echo’). Ostensibly, then, ElevenLabs now offers men’s
and women’s voices on an equal footing, with similar prompts
and preset flirtatious messages. Regardless of this ‘gendered
parity’, it is unknown whether these voices are perceived simi-
larly by users, whether they embody specific portrayals of gen-
der and power, and whether they reinforce harmful stereotypes.
In this work, we aim to explore listeners’ reactions to par-
ticular speech styles (defined by ElevenLabs asflirt, flirty,and
temptress) within sets of synthesised,genderedvoices. We con-
sider them gendered in that a sex/gender term (in this case,male
orfemale) is included in the prompt. We approach these voices,
as representative outputs of a larger system, from the perspec-
tive of Feminist HCI [13, 14], drawing attention to how tech-
nologies are shaped by and encode gender relations.
To explore perceptions of the voices, we carry out a novel
listening test, gathering reactions from a diverse set of North
American English-speaking listeners. We first examine whether
male- and female-coded voices differ in the overall distribution
of evaluative judgments assigned by listeners. We then dis-
tinguish between effects of vocal and prosodic characteristics
and those of linguistic content, by comparing responses across
conditions where voice style and spoken text are independently
varied. Finally, we explore whether listener characteristics, in-
cluding gender identity and reported attraction, are associated
with differences in perception of the voices. Analysing the re-
sulting quantitative, qualitative and acoustic data, we find that a
narrow range of gender expressions, almost exclusively binary
and heteronormative, are represented. Listener evaluations re-
veal systematic asymmetries between male- and female-coded
voices: male voices are more often described using positive and
dominant adjectives, whereas female voices are more frequently
characterised as submissive and sexualised. These differences
persist even when the spoken text is held constant, suggesting
that stylised prosodic and paralinguistic features in the female-
coded voices contribute to these perceptions.
3657
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2411
2. Related work
Machine learning models, especially natural language mod-
els using word embeddings, reproduce and amplify stereotypes
present in their training data (e.g., [15]). In the study of hu-
man speech, listeners have been found to make different judg-
ments about information conveyed by voice quality in (per-
ceived) male vs female speakers (e.g., [16]; female speakers
were rated more negatively for some personality traits when
producingcreakyvoice, whilesmilingvoice recordings were
consistently rated higher for women compared to men). In the
study of anthropomorphic TTS systems, Holliday explored lis-
teners’ judgments of social and personal traits in US English
Siri voices [17]. Users’ subjective perceptions of specific qual-
ities indexed in TTS voices, such as ethnicity [18], non-binary
gender expression [19], and kawaii [20], have been investi-
gated. Along this line, we consider perceptions of attractive-
ness and personal agency or dominance. There exists extensive
research on perceptions of these qualities from human speech
(e.g., [21, 22, 23, 24]). However, we are not aware of any ex-
isting work exploring this in AI-generated voices, particularly
studies that consider listeners with diverse sexual orientations.
3. Listening experiment
3.1. Stimuli
Participants are presented with audio samples of different voices
generated with ElevenLabs’ ‘V oice Library’ 1. Some voices
are advertised with sexualised adjectives, e.g.,flirty,flirtor
temptress, while others are advertised with non-sexualised ad-
jectives, e.g.,informative,presenter, oreducational. For these
adjectives, ElevenLabs only advertises ‘female’ and ‘male’
voices. We select the most popular ‘female’ and ‘male’ voice in
each category, resulting in the following list of voice personas:
The Parisian temptress(flirt; female),The Southern gentleman
(flirt; male),The sophisticated charmer(flirty; female),The vel-
vet rogue(flirty; male),The midnight enchantress(temptress;
female),The velvet gentleman(temptress; male),The tech ex-
pert(informative; female),The documentary narrator(infor-
mative; male),The professional news anchor(presenter; fe-
male),The science enthusiast(educational; male).
For the voices with sexualised adjectives, we synthesise
sexualised and informative texts to isolate the effect of voice and
linguistic content. As sexualised text, we use those presented to
users on ElevenLabs’ website. As informative text, we syn-
thesise various excerpts of a modified version of the Rainbow
passage [25]. As a baseline, we synthesise the same excerpts
of the Rainbow Passage for the voices with non-sexualised ad-
jectives (i.e., informative, presenter, educational). In total, we
generate one sample of sexualised text per sexualised voice (6
in total), and two samples of Rainbow text for both sexualised
and non-sexualised voices (12 in total for each type of voice).
This design enables controlled comparisons of voice style in-
dependent of linguistic content while keeping the length of the
study to 20 minutes.
3.2. Method
In the listening test, participants listen to the audio samples
and select the three most suitable adjectives from a list to de-
scribe the voice. The assessment of language attitudes by se-
lecting adjectives from balanced lists is established in sociolin-
guistics [26], which we apply to the study of voice characteris-
1https://ariadnasc.github.io/synth-personas
Table 1:List of adjectives presented to participants.
positive
charismatic, charming, confident, easygoing,
friendly, humorous, intelligent, intimate,
kind, playful, pleasant, sincere, warm
negative
annoying, anxious, awkward, cold, creepy,
cringe, fake, forceful, hostile, indifferent,
intimidating, unintelligent, unpleasant
dominantconfident, dominant, forceful, intense, serious
submissiveanxious, awkward, shy, submissive, timid
sexualexotic, flirty, intimate, seductive, sensual
tics. We adopted this task rather than Likert-type rating scales
commonly used in TTS evaluation, or exclusively free-text re-
sponses, as it allows us to collect a large number of evalua-
tive judgments while minimising participant fatigue. In ad-
dition, this approach avoids variability in scale interpretation
across participants. Compared to fully open-ended responses,
a controlled adjective list also facilitates systematic compari-
son across participants while still capturing subtle variation in
perception per stimulus. The listening test was presented to par-
ticipants as a website created using the jsPsych toolkit [27].
Participants complete a total of 30 trials with the stimuli ex-
plained in section 3.1, which are randomised to avoid order ef-
fects. Each screen allows the participant to listen to each audio
sample as many times as they need, and select three adjectives
from a total of 36 as listed in Table 1. Adjectives were presented
in 4 columns of 9 words, also randomised in each trial to avoid
order effects. Each screen also allows for an optional free-text
response where extra adjectives or comments can be added.
We assigned 1-2 labels to each adjective, and ensured
that participants saw equal numbers of words in the posi-
tive/negative and dominant/submissive sets. Our classifications
were verified by referring to [28], such that words appearing in
our positive/negative lists had scores above/below average for
‘valence’ and dominant/submissive words had above/below av-
erage scores for ‘dominance’, respectively. ‘Sexualised’ adjec-
tives had high scores on all three dimensions (valence, arousal
and dominance). The word list was refined over several sep-
arate pilot studies: we removed particularly ambiguous words
and added words that pilot participants had entered in the free
text field. At the end of the study, participants were asked to
provide an overall impression of the voices they had listened to,
and what they think the study was about. We also asked partici-
pant demographic questions such as age, gender (single answer:
man, woman, non-binary, agender, prefer not to say, free-text
response), attraction (multiple choice, with the same options as
in the gender question), ethnicity (single answer), and regular
languages used (free-text response).
3.3. Participants
Participants are recruited using the online platform Prolific. All
participants are current residents of the United States or Canada,
with no reported hearing conditions. Our study includes ques-
tions about participants’ current gender and attraction, and we
use this information to sort them into four groups, as listed be-
low. We avoid using descriptions like ‘straight’ or ‘queer’ be-
cause we did not ask whether the participants identified with
these labels [29, 30]. We aimed to recruit roughly 30 partici-
pants per group; however, Groups 1 and 3 are larger, as they
include people who are attracted to multiple genders including
their own. Our sample is designed to include representation of
non-heterosexual people, who are often excluded in research.
3658
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
positive
negative
dominantsubmissive
sexualised
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
positive
negative
dominantsubmissive
sexualised
Proportions of different adjective types selected, comparing voice type and text type
Category
f_sexualised_informative
f_sexualised_sexualised
m_sexualised_informative
m_sexualised_sexualised
Category
f_informative_informative
f_sexualised_informative
m_informative_informative
m_sexualised_informative
Figure 1:Comparing the proportions of positive, negative, dominant, submissive, and sexualised adjectives given to different sets of
male and female voices. Blue/turquoise = ‘male’ voices; red/orange = ‘female’ voices.
• Group 1: women; attracted to women (exclusively or not)
(N=40)
• Group 2: women; attracted to men only (N=21)
• Group 3: men; attracted to men (exclusively or not) (N=34)
• Group 4: men; attracted to women only (N=25)
4. Results
We first address the overall distribution of evaluative judgments
for male- and female-coded voices. We fitted generalised lin-
ear mixed effects regression models withnlminbwrapoptimiser,
using lme4 in R, to examine the distribution of each group of
adjectives with voice gender (female or male), text type (sex-
ualised or Rainbow Passage), participant group (1-4), partic-
ipant’s age (z-scored) as fixed effects and including partici-
pant ID as a random effect. The standard alpha level of 0.05
was adopted for all tests. In the entire dataset, we find that
male-coded voices are more frequently ascribeddominant(p
=<.001) andpositive(p= 0.0027) adjectives. Female-coded
voices are more frequently described usingsubmissive(p=
<.001) andsexualised(p=<.001) terms.Negativeadjectives
are distributed roughly equally across male and female voices.
We also considered content effects of the text spoken in
audio samples, comparing ElevenLabs’ scripted ‘flirty’ text
against excerpts from the Rainbow Passage. Figure 1 displays
the proportion of adjective types for all type of voices. The two
sets of sexualised voices with sexualised text receive broadly
similar proportions of sexualised adjectives (57% of all adjec-
tives chosen for female voices, 46% for male), but when the
same voices are paired with Rainbow Passage text, the pro-
portion of sexualised adjectives drops to 36% for female and
18% for male voices. This finding suggests that the text con-
tent makes a bigger difference to listeners’ perceptions of the
male voices in the set. One possible explanation is that per-
ceptions of the female voices are also driven by their prosodic
and paralinguistic features, like breathiness and sighs, which
are absent from the female ‘presenter’ voices. The same effect
is apparent when we examined the most commonly chosen ad-
jectives, across all listeners, for each voice. For 2/3 of the male
sexualised voices, listeners’ perceptions seem to be content-
dependent, as the most used adjectives includeseductive,sen-
sual, andcreepywhen sexualised text is used but change tocon-
fident,seriousandintensewith Rainbow Passage text. For 2/3
of the female equivalents, the most frequently used adjectives
areseductive,sensual, andintimateregardless of content.
Regarding the effects of listeners’ own identity, we fitted
new linear regression models, using the same package and op-
timizer, to examine the types of adjectives applied to subsets
of the recordings (female and male sexualised voices with sex-
ualised text). These models take participant group (1-4) and
age (z-scored) as fixed effects and participant ID as a random
effect, and the outcome variable is the adjective type used in
each observation (0 or 1). We observe some statistical differ-
ences between Group 4 (men who are attracted to women only)
and other groups. Group 4 are more likely than any other to
apply sexualised adjectives to sexualised female voices (p=
0.0088); less likely to apply negative adjectives to sexualised
female voices (p= 0.0009); and more likely to choose positive
words for sexualised male voices (p= 0.0017). Figure 2 shows
the proportion of adjective categories for each participant type.
Finally, we also calculated mean F0 and speaking rate for
each voice in the study to understand general acoustic and
prosodic differences between the voices. Both show some dif-
ferences between the sexualised and the informative voices.
Mean F0 is lower for sexualised male voices (70.08 Hz) than
informative male voices (110.88 Hz), while female voices show
less of a difference (204.73 Hz for sexualised, 211.43 Hz for
informative). Speaking rate, defined as the total amount of syl-
lable nuclei divided by duration (in seconds) [31] shows that
sexualised voices are slower on average, regardless of gender-
ing (2.4 for sexualised; 3.8 for informative).
4.1. Qualitative analysis of participants’ comments
For each audio sample, participants were asked ‘Are there any
other adjectives or any comments that you would like to make
about the voice?’. 52 participants made one or more optional
comments. We analysed 280 comments (151 on female and
129 on male voices), after excluding comments unrelated to the
voices. 53 of these (24 F, 29 M) were positive (e.g., ‘pleas-
ant’, ‘soothing’), and 143 (81 F, 62 M) negative (e.g., ‘dull’,
‘uncomfortable to listen to’). Responses like ‘robotic’, ‘me-
chanical’, ‘unnatural’, ‘artificial’, ‘AI’ were coded as negative,
and these account for 35 (24%) of the negative comments. We
coded 84 comments as neither positive or negative, including a)
those describing a voice’s suitability or use case (‘like an audio-
book’; ‘like the voice on TikToks’), b) words like ‘standard’,
‘generic’, ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’, c) comments on speech
rate without value judgement (‘slow’), or d) descriptions like
‘sexy’, ‘flirty’, ‘erotic’, ‘porn voice’ without expressing a value
judgement (24 total; 17 F, 7 M).
Although the number of critical comments was relatively
balanced across female (81) and male voices (62), we note
3659
(a)Sexualised voices with sexualised text.
 (b)Sexualised voices with informative text.
Figure 2:Breakdown of adjective types for sexualised voices with different types of text (sexualised/informative) per participant group.
some qualitative differences in their content. Multiple nega-
tive comments on male voices describe them as ‘bland’, ‘flat’,
‘dull’, ‘monotonous’ or ‘boring’ (n = 16), while others men-
tion ‘threatening’, ‘predatory’ and ‘rapey’ (n = 7). Recurring
themes in comments on female voices include ‘annoying’ (3),
‘jarring’ (2), ‘gross’ (2), ‘harsh’ (2), ‘uncomfortable’ (3), and
sounding ‘forced’, ‘trying’ or ‘attempting’ (unsuccessfully) to
convey positive qualities (6). ‘Monotonous’ and ‘dull’ appear
in a smaller proportion for this set (18.6%) compared with the
male voices (35.6%). A participant in Group 1 wrote: ‘I hate
that I’ve only marked women’s voices as annoying!’. Another,
in Group 3, ‘This sounds more like a teenage boy’s idea of what
sounds sexy than an actually sensual voice’. Such comments
suggest that some listeners perceived the vocal performances as
caricatured, male-authored fantasies of femininity.
5. Discussion
We found qualitative and quantitative differences in a diverse
group of listeners’ reactions to male and female-coded sexu-
alised voices showcased in ElevenLabs’ V oice Library. Namely,
male voices were more likely to elicit positive adjectives and
those relating to high agency or dominance compared to female
voices, which more often elicit submissive and sexualised de-
scriptions. Comments on the male voices often pointed to ei-
ther exaggerated dominance or to a lack of affect, while several
comments on female voices can reasonably be read as index-
ing amplified or exaggerated performances of femininity: over-
performed, excessively sexualised, and infantilised. As one par-
ticipant explains in a comment about their overall impression of
the voices, ‘The more sensual-sounding ones could be uncom-
fortable to listen to... especially the female ones often felt very
stereotyped and made me feel a bit gross’.
The ready-made prompts for these voice personas (see sup-
plementary materials) also reveal how stereotypically mascu-
line and feminine ways of speaking are constructed and linked
to value judgments. All three female sexualised voices’ prompts
mention ‘breathy’; two of them include the descriptor ‘hon-
eyed’, while male voices are ‘smooth’ and ‘like aged whiskey’.
We also note some unexpected uses of language in prompts,
such as ‘baritone’ producing voices that are bass in musical
terms. Exoticisation of European accents/identity is apparent:
three of the six sexualised voices are described as either French
or ‘Mediterranean’, while the informative ones have ‘neutral
American’ or ‘professional American’ accents. Several listen-
ers commented that sexualised voices’ accents sounded ‘fake’
or inconsistent; one was identified as Irish-accented despite the
prompt specifying ‘a slight French accent’ (see also [32]).
These voices are marketed for use in the creative indus-
tries such as video game and film development, presumably
supplanting the work of human voice actors like those inter-
viewed in [33] who explained how workers’ rights, safety, and
the intimate, personal expression of voice acting were threat-
ened by the framing of endlessly customisable TTS. In the same
way that video games have historically displayed a very narrow,
stereotyped ideal of visual attractiveness for female characters
(young, white, thin, with disproportionately large breasts) [34],
these voices represent a clich ´ed, heteronormative vocal attrac-
tiveness schema. Given the increasing prevalence of conversa-
tional AI, such representations may also influence users’ own
speaking styles through processes such as linguistic accommo-
dation and acoustic–prosodic entrainment [35].
6. Conclusion and future directions
Personas like ‘The Parisian temptress’, which listeners de-
scribed as ‘soooo cringe’, ‘trying to sound sexy but it’s just
annoying’ and ‘on drugs’, are auditory caricatures of a spe-
cific performance of femininity. Unlike actual online or phone
sex work, though, it is unclear that any human woman retains
agency, control, or profits from this performance.
The 21st century has seen an increase in representation of
queer, trans and gender diverse identities in mainstream media.
If the voices in this study are representative of ElevenLabs’ con-
struction of speakers, they appear to ignore this cultural turn
in favour of dated stereotypes. Natural language prompted AI
models, on the surface, offer creativity and customisability, but
‘straight values explicitly and implicitly embedded’ in model
design can marginalise queer users, as in the case of image gen-
eration models [36, 37]. Similarly, the prescribed use of sexu-
alised voices in ElevenLabs’ ‘creative’ platform appears to 