BELLA: Efficient Bilevel Learning with LoRA for Multilingual ASR
A F M Saif1,∗∗, Xiaodong Cui2, Brian Kingsbury2, Tianyi Chen3,1
1 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA
2 IBM, USA, 3 Cornell Tech, USA
saifa@rpi.edu, cuix@us.ibm.com, bedk@us.ibm.com, chentianyi19@gmail.com
Abstract
Multilingual automatic speech recognition (ASR) faces chal-
lenges due to diverse linguistic structures and resource dispari-
ties. We propose an efficientBilEvelLearning withLoRAfor
Multilingual Speech Recognition (BELLA), a framework that
couples a pre-trained ASR encoder with a large language model
(LLM) decoder via a trainable bridge to align speech represen-
tations with the LLM token space. The decoder incorporates
mixture-of-experts LoRA (MoE-LoRA) modules for language
specialization, guided by a router. Training is formulated as a
bilevel program: the upper level optimizes router and expert
LoRA modules for task performance, while the lower level up-
dates the bridge and shared adapter for alignment. We develop
an efficient single-loop, value-function-free penalty solver with
practical updates. BELLA is parameter-efficient, scalable, and
reduces cross-language interference. Experiments on five CoV-
oST 2 languages show consistent gains over strong multilingual
ASR baselines.
Index Terms: Multilingual speech recognition, bilevel opti-
mization, large language model, mixture of experts, parameter-
efficient fine-tuning
1. Introduction
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) aims to transcribe spoken
audio into text, addressing variations across speakers, acous-
tic conditions, and languages. This task becomes particularly
complex in multilingual settings, where robust performance is
required across diverse linguistic structures, vocabularies, and
phonetic inventories. Recent advancements have sought to en-
hance ASR by integrating large language models (LLMs) as de-
coders. LLMs leverage contextual reasoning and text generation
capabilities honed from extensive pre-training [1–4]. A preva-
lent approach pairs a pre-trained speech encoder with a frozen or
lightly tuned LLM decoder, connected via a lightweight bridge
that maps speech features into the LLM’s embedding space,
often supported by prompt engineering [5–7].
While this encoder-LLM framework simplifies deployment
and capitalizes on pre-trained components, it predominantly
targets monolingual or bilingual scenarios. Extending it to mul-
tilingual ASR introduces challenges, notably cross-language
interference, where high-resource languages can dominate train-
ing, impairing performance on low-resource ones. This issue
stems from shared decoder parameters struggling to reconcile
conflicting linguistic patterns without extensive fine-tuning, lim-
iting scalability.
**indicates the corresponding author.
This work was supported by IBM through the IBM-Rensselaer Fu-
ture of Computing Research Collaboration, and by the National Science
Foundation Projects 2532653 and 2532349.
To overcome these limitations and enable efficient multilin-
gual ASR without full LLM retraining, we propose a decoder-
side mixture-of-experts with LoRA adapters (MoE-LoRA) [8].
In MoE-LoRA, selected decoder blocks contain a small bank
of LoRA “expert” adapters plus a single shared adapter that is
always active. A lightweight router dynamically selects rele-
vant LoRA experts per utterance, fostering language-specific
specialization while preserving parameter efficiency. However,
this design reveals a critical interdependence: the router depends
on bridge-generated features for gating, where poor speech-text
alignment may cause unstable routing (e.g., leading to mode
collapse or bias toward dominant languages). Conversely, the
chosen adapters influence gradients back to the bridge, creating
a bidirectional coupling that requires careful management.
This bidirectional dependency indicates that a more struc-
tured approach is needed to manage the interaction. Thus, we
propose to address this challenge with a bilevel optimization
framework that separates alignment from prediction while pre-
serving their interaction through the gating mechanism. The
lower level optimizes cross-modal alignment via the bridge and
a shared adapter, ensuring accurate feature mapping. The upper
level refines task-specific performance by tuning the router and
LoRA experts to reduce recognition errors and promote balanced
language representation. Our contributions are: (i) We formal-
ize multilingual encoder-LLM ASR as a bilevel optimization
problem, with the upper level managing next token prediction
(router and LoRA experts) and the lower level handling align-
ment (bridge and shared adapter). (ii) We explicitly model the
coupling by linking the router’s gating to bridge outputs, en-
abling alignment to guide expert selection while allowing feed-
back via decoder losses. (iii) We implement this using a Whisper
encoder and Qwen-family decoder, integrating next-token pre-
diction with alignment and distillation objectives [9,10]. (iv) We
develop an efficient single-loop training algorithm that alternates
alignment and specialization, avoiding costly inner loops and
aligning with existing encoder-LLM paradigms [5–7].
2. Related Work
Motivated by the powerful reasoning ability and long-context
handling of LLMs, recent work has explored integrating LLMs
into ASR systems. Some efforts fine-tune or extend LLMs
end-to-end for speech-centric applications [11, 12]. Given the
computational cost of full-model updates, a practical alternative
is to keep the LLM largely frozen and insert a lightweight bridge
or adapter to map speech encoder outputs into the LLM input
space, sometimes complemented by prompt-based conditioning
[6,7,13]. Related lines of work also consider parameter-efficient
or modular adaptation inside the decoder to better leverage pre-
trained capacity while controlling footprint [14].
2125
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2771
LLM Decoder, 𝑭𝚯
ASR Encoder
(Whisper)
ℎ = 𝐸(𝑠)
Bridge 
Network
𝑧𝜓 = 𝐵𝜓 ℎ
Router
𝑔𝜙 
1st LoRA
2nd LoRA
nth LoRA
.
.
.
Upper-Level: Router + Expert LoRAs
(prediction-driven)
Shared Adapter
Bridge + Shared Adapter
(alignment-driven)
Lower-Level:
Fig. 1. The model architecture of BELLA. The main components
include an ASR encoder, a frozen LLM decoder, and trainable
modules: bridge network, router, and adapters.
Most encoder–LLM ASR work focuses on a single or a
few languages, leaving cross-language interference and scaling
underexplored. We address multilingual ASR with multiple low-
rank adapters in the decoder and a lightweight router that selects
experts per utterance, trained in a bilevel manner: alignment
(bridge plus shared adapter) at the lower level and ASR-oriented
next token prediction (router plus adapters) at the upper level,
coupled through the router’s gating on bridge outputs. This
design complements existing encoder–LLM pipelines [6, 7].
Bilevel optimization models hierarchical learning problems
in which an upper-level leader optimization problem depends on
the solution of a lower-level follower optimization problem. It
has been widely studied in hyperparameter optimization, meta-
learning, and neural architecture search [15 –17]. Recent ad-
vances enable scalable training in deep networks via implicit
differentiation and single-loop penalty-based approximations
that avoid explicit inner solves [18]. In ASR, however, the use of
bilevel optimization remains limited; recent efforts have applied
it to joint self-supervised training and to improving BEST-RQ
pretraining [19–21].
3. Model Architecture
We adopt the architecture shown in Fig. 1 formultilingual ASR,
where each training example is denoted as (s,ℓ,t)∈D train,
where s represents a speech waveform in language ℓ, and
t= (t 1,...,t U) is its corresponding transcript with length
U over a vocabularyV. A pre-trained ASR encoder E trans-
forms the speech into frame-level featuresh=E(s)∈R Te×de,
whereTe is the number of acoustic frames and de the feature
dimension. A trainable bridgeBψ, parameterized byψ, converts
these features into a sequence of continuous prefix embeddings
zψ =B ψ(h)∈R Tb×dLLM, where Tb is the (possibly sub-
sampled) sequence length and dLLM is the LLM embedding
dimension. This bridge serves as a critical link, projecting raw
speech representations into a space compatible with the decoder.
The decoder is a frozen LLM FΘ with base weights Θ, en-
hanced by learnable MoE-LoRA for adaptability. We introduce
K expert adapters{∆k}K
k=1, inserted into selected LLM layers,
alongside a shared adapter ∆0 that is always active. A routergϕ,
parameterized byϕ, generates mixture weights by processing a
summary vector u constructed from the speech prefix embed-
dings and language identity. In practice, u is obtained by mean
pooling the bridge outputs zψ and concatenating the result with
a learned language embedding for ℓ. The weights are defined
asw=g ϕ(u),wherew∈R K, wk≥0, PK
k=1wk = 1.
which lies on the probability simplex over K experts. Each
adapted LLM layer applies the adapter mixture:
A(w) = ∆0 +
KX
k=1
wk∆k.
4. Problem Formulation
We prepend prompt tokens, including a language token forℓ, and
feed zψ as a continuous prefix into LLM FΘ. Training of the
model in Fig.1 involves optimizing prediction-driven objectives
and alignment-driven objectives, respectively. In this work, we
formulate it as a bilevel optimization problem which has the
prediction-driven objectives as a leader (a.k.a upper) problem and
alignment-driven objectives as a follower (a.k.a lower) problem.
Denote the LLM next-token distribution as
pΘ(·|context;x,y)
where the decoder is augmented with the aforementioned
adapters and router. We group theupper-levelparameters as
x:={ϕ,w,∆ 1:K} (prediction-driven components) and the
lower-levelparameters as y:={ψ,∆ 0} (alignment-driven com-
ponents). Note thatw depends on both the router parametersϕ
and the bridge parametersψ (viazψ), establishing a key coupling
between the upper and lower optimization levels.
4.1. Upper level losses
The primary ASR objective is the negative log-likelihood of the
next token, given by
LASR(x,y;s,ℓ,t) =−
UX
u=1
logp Θ(tu|t <u,zψ,ℓ;x,y).(1)
This loss is a proxy for transcription accuracy. To regularize
the router, we include a load-balancing term Lbal(ϕ) [22], a
small entropy penaltyLent(ϕ) [23], and an optional language-
ID supervision lossL LID(ϕ;ℓ).
4.2. Lower level losses
For alignment between speech and text prefixes, we use two
regularization terms: an embedding regression loss and a distil-
lation loss. The embedding loss, computed using a frozen text
encoderetext(t) and a learned projection Π, averages the squared
distance over time:
Lemb(y;s,t) = 1
Tb
TbX
i=1
∥zi −Π(e text,i(t))∥2
2 (2)
wherei indexes the time steps of the bridge output, andetext,i(t)
denotes thei-th hidden state of the text encoder given transcript
t. This encourages zψ to match text-derived embeddings. In ad-
dition, we have a teacher-student distillation loss that compares
decoder distributions in the embedding alignment:
LKD(x,y;s,ℓ,t) =
KL

pΘ(·|e text(t),ℓ;x,y)
pΘ(·|z ψ(s),ℓ;x,y)

(3)
where the text-conditioned teacher guides the speech-
conditioned student to align the embeddings. We also apply
weight decay to the shared adapter, Lwd(y) =∥∆ 0∥2
2. Note
thatLemb depends only on y (viaψ and ∆0), whileLKD de-
pends on both x and y through the decoder, including ∆(w)
linked tow=g ϕ(u(zψ,ℓ)).
2126
4.3. Bilevel objectives and coupling
The expectedupper-levelobjective for the leader problem, fo-
cusing on prediction performance, is defined as
f(x,y) =E (s,ℓ,t)
h
LASR(x,y;s,ℓ,t) +λ balLbal(ϕ)
+λ entLent(ϕ) +λ LIDLLID(ϕ;ℓ)
i
.
(4)
The expectedlower-levelobjective for the follower problem,
emphasizing acoustic and text token embedding alignment, is
defined as
g(x,y) =E (s,ℓ,t)
h
αembLemb(y;s,t)
+α KDLKD(x,y;s,ℓ,t) +α wdLwd(y)
i
.
(5)
The overall bilevel optimization problem is given by
min
x
f(x,y ⋆(x))(6)
s.t.y ⋆(x)∈arg min
y
g(x,y).(7)
For fixed upper level parameters x, the lower level
problem optimizes y to find an optimum y⋆(x)∈
arg minyg(x,y) , while the upper level minimizes the value
functionF(x) :=f(x,y ⋆(x)). The interdependence of the up-
per and lower levels arises becausew=g ϕ(u(zψ,ℓ)) tiesf to
y (viazψ in u, affectingw and ∆(w)) andg tox (via ∆(w) and
decoder distributions inLKD). This coupling balances alignment
and prediction in a hierarchical fashion.
5. Optimization
To avoid expensive inner solves or implicit differentiation, we
use a single-loop, value-function-free penalty-based gradient
descent method [24]. Consider the penalized objective as
˜Fγ(x,y) =f(x,y) +γ

g(x,y)−min
z
g(x,z)

,γ >0,(8)
and alternate one update ofy (primarily minimizingg) with one
update ofx, minimizingfusing the updatedy.
Given the current parameters (xt,yt), sample a mini-batch
of training examples. Let gt(xt,yt) andft(xt,yt) denote the
stochastic mini-batch evaluations of the objectives in (5) and (4),
respectively. We first perform a lower-level gradient update:
yt+1 =y t−ηy

γ−1∇yft(xt,yt) +∇ygt(xt,yt)

,(9)
with stepsizeηy >0 . In practice, we often setγ−1≈0 , making
(9) predominantly alignment-driven viaLemb,LKD, andLwd.
Note that when computing gradients with respect toy (the bridge
and shared adapter), we must backpropagate through the router’s
gating. In other words, becausew=g ϕ(u(zψ,ℓ)) depends on
zψ (which in turn depends on y viaBψ and ∆0), the gradient
∇y of both gt and ft will flow through this coupling. This
means updates toy implicitly affect the router’s inputs and thus
its expert-selection decisions. We highlight this gradient path to
emphasize the intertwined nature of the two levels: changingy
influencesw (and thereby the upper-level loss) even thoughy is
optimized for the lower-level objective.
With yt+1 fixed, sample a mini-batch to estimate
ft(xt,yt+1)from (4) and update
xt+1 =x t−ηx∇xft(xt,yt+1),(10)
with stepsize ηx >0 . This minimizes the ASR loss (1) and
router regularizers, specializing experts by language while con-
trolling usage entropy and (optionally) supervising language-
ID. Straight-through top-1 gating or a smooth relaxation (e.g.,
Gumbel-Softmax) can be used; any bias is absorbed into the
Algorithm 1:BELLA Training Algorithm
Input:Frozen encoderE, decoderF Θ, bridgeBψ,
experts{∆k}K
k=1, shared adapter ∆0, routergϕ,
penaltyγ, stepsizesη x,ηy
Initializex 0 ={ϕ 0,∆ 1:K,0},y 0 ={ψ 0,∆ 0,0}
fort= 0,...,T−1do
Sample mini-batchesB g
t,Bf
t ⊂D train
// Lower level (alignment)
Computegt(xt,yt):
gt(xt,yt)← −Lemb,LKD,Lwd
Computeft(xt,yt):
ft(xt,yt)← −LASR,Lbal,Lent,LLID
yt+1 =y t−ηy
 
γ−1∇yft(xt,yt)+∇ygt(xt,yt)

// Upper level (prediction):
Computeft(xt,yt+1):
ft(xt,yt)← −LASR,Lbal,Lent,LLID
xt+1 =x t−ηx∇xft(xt,yt+1)
end
returnxT,yT
stochasticity offt.
6. Experimental Setup
In this section, we describe the implementation details, experi-
mental setup, and results of BELLA.
6.1. Implementation
Setup.We instantiate the encoder as Whisper (E), the decoder as
Qwen2.5 7B (FΘ with frozen base Θ), the bridgeBψ and shared
adapter ∆0 as lower-level modules, and theK MoE-LoRA ex-
perts{∆k} with routergϕ as upper-level modules (Fig. 1). As
in Sec. 4, we denotex={ϕ,∆ 1:K} andy={ψ,∆ 0}, and use
the explicit objectivesf(x,y)andg(x,y)in (4)–(5).
Alternating procedure.Based on Sec. 5, training alternates
lower- and upper-level updates forT outer iterations. In iteration
t, we (approximately) solve the lower-level problem for the
currentxt using (9), then update the upper level using (10) at
the resulting yt+1. For multilingual training, one can shard
data by language and run several inner (lower) steps per shard
before aggregating gradients for the upper step; the coupling via
w=g ϕ(u(zψ,ℓ))remains in effect in both updates.
Initialization and practicalities.Initialize E and FΘ from
their available checkpoints. Initialize ∆1:K and ∆0 near zero
(standard LoRA practice) and optionally warm-start the bridge
Bψ with a brief alignment-only phase usingLemb. A soft gating
scheme (e.g., temperature-controlled) can stabilize early routing
before switching to hard/top-1 gating if desired. Label smoothing
forL ASR and moderateγvalues in (8) are common choices.
Remarks.Setting γ−1=0 recovers purely alignment-driven
lower updates; using γ−1>0 allowsf to weakly influence y
in (9). The coupling path x↔y is explicit through w=
gϕ(u(zψ,ℓ))and through the decoder terms in (3).
6.2. Experiments
We evaluate on COVOST 2 [25] using English, Portuguese,
Spanish, Russian, and Swedish. These languages were selected
to cover a range of language families and resource conditions
– for instance, English (Germanic) and Spanish (Romance) are
high-resource languages, Russian (Slavic) has a different script
2127
Fig. 2. MoE-LoRA expert selection probabilities by language.
Table 1. WER (%) on CoV oST 2 using Whisper-Base.
Language Base BO SL MLBELLA
English 26.8 26.2 25.925.325.5
Spanish 31.2 30.8 30.729.829.9
Russian 36.2 36.1 35.930.435.5
Portuguese 30.4 30.1 30.0 29.729.4
Swedish 47.9 47.7 47.6 47.447.1
and moderate resources, while Swedish (Germanic) represents
a smaller-resource case. This diversity allows us to assess
BELLA’s performance across varied linguistic and data scarcity
scenarios. The sampling rate is 16kHz and the duration is capped
at 30s. Clips shorter than 0.5s are removed. During training, we
apply a light random concatenation augmentation that stitches
multiple utterances (up to 30s).
Our acoustic encoder is Whisper [10] (base and large-v2). A
segment-level Q-Former (80 queries, 2 blocks, 8 heads) connec-
tor [6] projects encoder features to the LLM token embedding
space. The decoder is Qwen-2.5 7B [9] adapted with LoRA (rank
16). We adapt the query and key in the attention module in each
decoder layer. A multilingual router mixes five expert projec-
tions over the speech prefix, conditioned on pooled Q-Former
outputs and a learned language embedding.
The lower-level alignment mapping is trained with
αemb=0.1, αKD=0.05 and αwd=1e-4. The upper-level pre-
diction is trained with λbal=0.01, λent=0.01 and an optional
λLID=0.1. Two auxiliary heads (first-token and prefix prediction)
are trained with warm-up weights (λfirst=0.003,λprefix=0.003).
A conservative token-drop schedule (warmup 8k steps, ramp 8k
steps, max drop probability 0.03, keep fraction 0.95) stabilizes
long prefixes. Optimization uses AdamW, gradient clipping at
1.0, batch size 16 with accumulation 2, and up to 500 epochs
with early stopping. We apply separate learning rates: 2×10−4
for upper-level parameters (router, experts, auxiliary heads) and
5×10−5 for lower-level parameters (encoder, Q-Former, shared
LoRA). We prepend a short prompt:“Transcribe the speech:”.
Decoding uses beam search (beam size 3).
6.3. Results
We compareBELLAagainst matched Whisper backbones at the
base and large scales together with three intermediate baselines:
Whisper+LLM with bridge only (BO), Whisper+LLM with a
single shared LoRA module (SL), and a multilingual LoRA
baseline (ML) that assigns a predefined LoRA adapter to each
Table 2. WER (%) on CoV oST 2 using Whisper-Large.
Language Large BO SL MLBELLA
English 14.8 14.1 13.813.113.5
Spanish 12.1 11.7 11.510.911.0
Russian 9.9 9.6 9.48.99.1
Portuguese 10.6 10.2 10.1 9.89.7
Swedish 14.7 14.4 14.2 14.013.8
language. Results on five CoV oST 2 languages are shown in
Tables 1 and 2.
Across most languages and backbone sizes, BELLA
achieves the lowest or highly competitive WER, indicating that
the proposed bilevel routing mechanism provides gains beyond
simple model scaling. The improvements are consistent rather
than isolated to particular languages, suggesting that the routing
mechanism provides systematic benefits for multilingual ASR.
Comparing toWhisper-base, BELLA reduces WER by
roughly 2–4% relative to the vanilla backbone and consistently
outperforms BO and SL. This demonstrates that routed expert
specialization improves performance even when backbone ca-
pacity is limited. The ML baseline performs competitively and
slightly outperforms BELLA for some high-resource languages,
which is expected since ML provides explicit language-specific
specialization when language identity is known. However, ML
requires maintaining separate adapters for each language and
relies on explicit language selection at inference time, which
is not scaling friendly. In contrast, BELLA learns specializa-
tion dynamically through router-based expert selection con-
ditioned on speech representations, enabling language-aware
adaptation without predefined language modules. With the
strongerWhisper-Largebackbone, overall WER decreases,
while BELLA continues to deliver consistent improvements
over the baseline Whisper system. These gains persist even
when backbone capacity is high, indicating that BELLA com-
plements model scaling rather than merely compensating for
weaker encoders. Overall, the results demonstrate robustness
across languages and model sizes. The consistent gap between
SL and BELLA confirms the benefit of routed multi-expert adap-
tation over a single shared LoRA module. Moreover, the stability
of gains across backbone scales suggests that the bilevel formula-
tion effectively balances global alignment with language-aware
specialization, mitigating cross-language interference in multi-
lingual ASR.
Figure 2 (test-set average) shows a clear tendency for indi-
vidual experts to specialize to particular languages, with small
off-diagonal probabilities. This indicates stable routing behavior
and non-collapsed MoE-LoRA specialization under BELLA.
7. Conclusion
We studied multilingual ASR with an LLM decoder through
a bilevel training formulation that separates alignment and
language-specific specialization. The lower level learns cross-
modal alignment via the bridge and shared adapter, while the
upper level optimizes router-driven expert adaptation for predic-
tion performance. This structure allows alignment and special-
ization to remain coupled through the routing mechanism while
avoiding full decoder fine-tuning. Experiments across multiple
languages and Whisper backbones show consistent reductions in
WER relative to strong baselines, indicating that the proposed
bilevel formulation effectively improves multilingual robustness.
2128