Gradient phonetic detail is less detrimental to word segmentation in
infant-directed speech
Gabriel Scharff, Megha Sundara
Department of Linguistics, University of California Los Angeles, USA
gbs@ucla.edu, megha.sundara@humnet.ucla.edu
Abstract
Computational models of word segmentation typically repre-
sent speech as sequences of phonemes, as in a dictionary, but
real speech contains substantial phonetic variation. In previ-
ous research on adult-directed speech, encoding phonetic vari-
ation has been found to degrade the ability of many algorithms
to detect word boundaries. We tested whether encoding pho-
netic detail also degrades detection of word boundaries by word
segmentation algorithms when tested on infant-directed speech.
Infant- and adult-directed speech differ in many ways: infant-
directed speech contains shorter words, more isolated single
word utterances, and a smaller vocabulary. Two of the four
algorithms evaluated showed no degradation in word segmen-
tation performance, with the other two showing only mod-
est degradation compared to previous reports on adult-directed
speech. These results suggest that finding words in infant-
directed speech may be more robust to phonetic variation in the
input than previously assumed.
Index Terms: word segmentation, phonetic variation, language
acquisition, unsupervised learning, computational modeling
1. Introduction
A fundamental challenge in language acquisition is word seg-
mentation, discovering where one word ends and the next be-
gins in continuous speech. Speech typically lacks silences be-
tween words, requiring learners to identify word boundaries
from the continuous acoustic signal. Starting around 5 months,
English-learning infants segment words from fluent speech
[1, 2, 3] exploiting several cues (e.g., [4, 5, 6, 7]). Computa-
tional models complement this experimental work by formaliz-
ing segmentation strategies and evaluating whether each strat-
egy succeeds when applied to natural language input at scale.
A common idealization in these models is to represent
speech as a sequence of phonemes, generated by replacing each
word with its dictionary pronunciation. In reality, speech is
highly variable. Segments are deleted, vowels reduced, and
consonants assimilate [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Infants also encode
this phonetic variation (e.g., [13, 14, 15]). They only gradually
learn to treat multiple variants as members of the same phone-
mic category by the end of the first year [16, 17]. Therefore,
idealizing the speech input by reducing the phonetic variability
misrepresents the nature of the input available to infants, likely
simplifying the acquisition problem.
One way to evaluate the consequences of input that re-
flects gradient phonetic detail from pronunciation variation is
to compare the performance of word segmentation models on
speech that is phonemically versus phonetically annotated as
in [18]. Beech & Swingley compared word segmentation per-
formance on dictionary transcriptions versus transcriptions that
include pronunciation variation in a corpus of adult-directed
speech, the Buckeye corpus [19]. This is a collection of spon-
taneous conversational speech from interviews with American
English-speaking adults. Because the Buckeye corpus marks
only conversational turn boundaries rather than within-turn ut-
terance boundaries, additional utterance boundaries were prob-
abilistically inserted between words to match the rate of utter-
ance boundaries observed in infant-directed speech. The ana-
lyzed speech comprised 30910 word tokens from four female
speakers. Segmentation algorithms were run on two versions of
the corpus, a version with dictionary pronunciations, in which
each orthographic word was replaced with its phonemic rep-
resentation, and a transcribed version, which reflected the ac-
tual variation in pronunciation by speakers. Word segmentation
performance (measured by F-scores) dropped by an average of
0.12 when algorithms were given transcriptions that included
pronunciation variation.
In this paper we evaluated whether word segmentation per-
formance also degrades for infant-directed speech, when pro-
nunciation variation is encoded in the input. The infant-directed
speech corpus used here encodes consonantal but not vowel
variation, whereas the adult-directed speech corpus used by [18]
includes both. However, the consonantal variation captured in
the infant-directed corpus is substantially broader, introducing
11 additional symbols beyond the phonemic inventory com-
pared to 3 in the corpus used in [18]. Beyond what is captured
in the transcription, there is the question of how much variation
exists in the speech itself. Evidence on whether infant-directed
speech is more or less variable than adult-directed speech is
mixed, particularly in spontaneous (not read) speech. At least
based on some empirical results, phonetic variation in English
infant-directed speech has been reported to be comparable to
that in adult-directed speech [20, 21, 8]. In other studies, infant-
directed speech has been reported to be less variable ([22]) or
even more variable than adult-directed speech ([23]).
There are other differences between adult- and infant-
directed speech that might modulate the effect of pronuncia-
tion variability on the performance of word segmentation algo-
rithms. Infant-directed speech differs structurally from adult-
directed speech in ways that could be more resilient to phonetic
variability: shorter utterances provide more word boundaries
by aligning more words with utterance edges, words tend to be
shorter with more edge-aligned segments favoring specific posi-
tional variants, and a higher proportion of isolated words could
also facilitate word segmentation [24, 25, 26, 27].
Whatever the differences between adult- and infant-directed
speech, word segmentation is not substantially easier when al-
gorithms are provided with infant-directed speech. Across a di-
verse set of algorithms, [28] report a small improvement in word
segmentation performance,∼3% on an infant-directed speech
2973
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2920
corpus, but often within the margin of error. Overall, the extent
of infant-directed speech advantage in word segmentation per-
formance varies from a low, unstable 3% reported in [28] up to
6% or even 15% in other studies [29]. In all cases, the speech
was phonemically transcribed and thus has limited variability
in the input signal, leaving open the question of how phonetic
variation affects segmentation in infant-directed speech.
We evaluated how much encoding phonetic variation in the
input is detrimental to segmentation of infant-directed speech.
To do so we compared the performance of four algorithms on
infant-directed speech that is phonemically or phonetically tran-
scribed. Next, we simulated the effects of less accumulated
language experience by using 1/10 of the corpus. Again, we
compared word segmentation performance on infant-directed
speech that is phonemically or phonetically transcribed. Our
reasoning was that younger infants have less language experi-
ence and are thus likely to have segmented smaller amounts of
the speech input. These two comparisons, full vs 1/10 of the
corpus, each phonemically or phonetically transcribed, also al-
lowed us to determine how corpus size affects word segmenta-
tion performance in the face of phonetic variability.1
2. Methods
2.1. Corpus
We evaluated the performance of word segmentation algorithms
on phonemic versus phonetically-transcribed infant-directed
speech in the PhonProv corpus ([8]). The PhonProv corpus is
based on the Providence Corpus ([30]), a collection of home
audio and video recordings of parent-child interactions with 5
monolingual American English-learning children. Speech was
sampled at two ages, 16-18 and 22-24 months, and phoneti-
cally transcribed. The corpus has 6970 utterances containing
31198 word tokens. The phonemic transcription uses 24 conso-
nant and 21 vowel symbols, while the phonetic uses 35 conso-
nant and 21 vowel symbols. The additional consonant symbols
in the phonetic transcription capture variation including aspi-
ration, unreleased stops, tapping, glottalization, affrication, as-
similation, devoicing, and deletion. There is no vowel variation
between the phonemic and phonetic corpora.
2.2. Preprocessing
The PhonProv corpus provides transcription in PRAAT ([31])
TextGrid files, one for each utterance. We extracted the seg-
ment tier, with the phonemic and phonetic representations in X-
SAMPA encoding. The transcriptions were converted to IPA,
and extraneous symbols including stress and length markers
were removed. Rhotacized@~and3~were preserved as sin-
gle symbols. Rhoticity on other vowels, which occurred only
a handful of times and broke the transcription guidelines given
to annotators, was split into the base vowel plusô. We used
sequence alignment to match vowel positions to correct for
transcriber errors in matching phonetic vowel bases with their
phonemic counterparts. Phones were separated with dot delim-
iters.
2.3. Segmentation algorithms
We tested four unsupervised algorithms whose implementations
are available in the WordSeg package [32], each representing
a different approach to discovering word boundaries. All four
1Code for segmentation and evaluation is available athttps://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20767608.
algorithms exploit statistical regularities in the distribution of
sounds and sound sequences to segment the speech stream. Two
of the four models additionally used a proto-lexicon generated
at an earlier iteration to segment words. That is, two of the
four models (PUDDLE, AG) use both bottom-up information
from the speech input as well as top-down information from
the proto-lexicon jointly to insert word boundaries. The other
two (DiBS, TP) use bottom-up information only. For each al-
gorithm, we report the best performing configuration, selected
by averaging performance across both transcription types and
corpus sizes.
2.3.1. Bottom-up Models: DiBS & TP
DiBS, Diphone-Based Segmentation [33], learns which pairs of
adjacent sounds are likely to span a word boundary. For exam-
ple, the pairgd(as at the boundary inbig dog) occurs frequently
across word boundaries, whiledo(as indog) occurs frequently
within words. DiBS assigns a boundary probability between 0
and 1 to each phrase-medial diphone, estimated from the fre-
quencies of phrase-initial and phrase-final phones, diphone fre-
quencies, and the overall probability of a phrase-medial word
boundary. In the phrasal version, which is unsupervised, these
frequencies are estimated from utterance edges. In the super-
vised version, they are estimated from true word edges. We use
the phrasal version, as it does not require prior knowledge of
word boundaries.
Transitional Probability algorithms [34] place word bound-
aries where the statistical association between adjacent sounds
is weak. For example, ingood boy, the transition from thedin
goodto thebinboyis relatively unpredictable compared to the
transition frombtoowithinboy, signaling a likely word bound-
ary. The WordSeg implementation of TP offers several metrics
for decision making, and the threshold for inserting boundaries
can be absolute or relative. Forward TP for a sequenceXYis
defined as the conditional probability ofYgivenX, backward
TP is the conditional probability ofXgivenY, and mutual in-
formation is the pointwise mutual information betweenXand
Y. In the relative version, a boundary is inserted betweenX
andYif the transition value is lower than that of the flanking
pairs. In the absolute version, a boundary is inserted when the
value falls below the corpus-wide average. We found the best
performance for backwards TP, with relative threshold, and that
is what we report in this paper ([18] instead used mutual infor-
mation).
2.3.2. Joint-Learning Models: PUDDLE & AG
PUDDLE, Phonotactics from Utterances Determine Distribu-
tional Lexical Elements [35], learns which sound sequences are
allowed at the edges of utterances and uses these patterns to find
word boundaries. For example, after encountering the worddog
in isolation, PUDDLE addsdogto its lexicon and stores the
doat the beginning and theogat the end as permitted edge bi-
grams. When it later encounters the sequencethe dog, it can use
these stored patterns to identify a boundary beforedog. PUD-
DLE processes the corpus incrementally, building up its lexicon
and its inventory of permitted word-onset and word-offset bi-
grams as it encounters more input. We used a bigram window
of 2 and 2-fold evaluation, in which the corpus is split into two
halves and processed in both orders, so that each utterance is
segmented after the model has already been trained on at least
half the corpus.
Adaptor Grammars [36] learn to segment speech by dis-
covering recurring sequences of sounds that behave like words.
2974
For example, after encounteringlook,at, andthein differ-
ent contexts, the model can use these stored units to segment
a frequent sequence likelookatthe. AGs are a generalization
of probabilistic context-free grammars that weaken the inde-
pendence assumption between rule applications, allowing non-
terminal symbols to map directly to previously stored subtrees.
A Pitman-Yor process governs subtree reuse, and segmentation
is estimated via Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling with min-
imum Bayes Risk decoding. We tested three AG configurations
that vary in their hierarchy of prespecified levels. In all config-
urations, the top level was the Utterance and the bottom level
was a sequence of segments, with a Target level in between at
which word units are discovered. The configurations differ in
how many additional intermediate levels (X) are added above
or below the Target level: U-T-Seg, U-X-T-X-Seg, and U-X-T-
X-X-Seg. All configurations performed similarly, so we report
results from the simplest configuration, U-T-Seg.
2.4. Performance evaluation
We evaluated model performance using token F-score, a stan-
dard metric for word segmentation that measures how well the
algorithm recovers the actual words in the corpus. Token F-
score is calculated as the harmonic mean of the ability of the
algorithm to find the actual word (recall), while not positing too
many nonwords (precision). Matching is position-aware, where
each word token is represented as a character span, and a pro-
posed token counts as correct only if it matches both the identity
and position of a word in the gold segmentation. For example, it
would not score as correcttoin the sequencetonight. The ran-
dom baseline, where word boundaries are inserted with a 50%
probability after every segment, provides a lower bound reflect-
ing chance performance. We report mean token F-scores aver-
aged across 10 runs, with each run evaluated on a 90% random
subset for the full corpus and a 1/10 subsample for the reduced
corpus.
3. Results
3.1. Overview
We found that segmentation models varied in their sensitivity to
phonetic detail, with some algorithms showing no degradation
and others showing moderate drops, always less than the drop
reported for adult-directed speech by [18]. Figure 1 summarizes
these results. Error bars represent standard deviations across 10
runs. Paired t-tests with Bonferroni correction confirmed the
reliability of reported differences. The random baseline scored
0.09 on phonemic and 0.10 on phonetic transcriptions for the
full corpus, and 0.09 and 0.10 respectively on the 1/10 corpus.
Figure 1:Word segmentation token F-scores
3.2. Full Corpus
On the full corpus, algorithms varied in their performance on
word segmentation as well as their sensitivity to phonetic de-
tail. All models were better than the random baseline (high-
est word segmentation F-score 0.58 for the AG algorithm; the
lowest F-score 0.30 for the TP algorithm). TP was also the al-
gorithm with the lowest performance at segmenting words in
adult-directed speech as reported by [18]. Word segmentation
accuracy was comparable for PUDDLE and DiBS on a phone-
mic transcription of infant-directed speech. This is the first
point of departure between the findings of [18] and the present
study; they found DiBS to have lower F-scores than PUDDLE
on the phonemic transcription of adult-directed speech. Other-
wise, the range of F-scores on adult-directed speech reported by
[18] is a little wider on the dictionary (phonemic) transcriptions,
than for infant-directed speech reported here.
Surprisingly, in contrast to the findings of [18], we saw lit-
tle reduction in performance with phonetically transcribed in-
put. One model of each type was resilient to phonetic varia-
tion in the input. Among models that use just bottom-up in-
formation, TP showed no degradation, in fact scoring higher
on phonetic (0.32) than phonemic (0.30) transcriptions. DiBS
showed the largest decrease on the full corpus, dropping from
0.41 on phonemic to 0.34 on the phonetically transcribed cor-
pus. Among models that use both bottom-up and top-down in-
formation, PUDDLE was similarly resilient, with near-identical
scores on phonemic (0.40) and phonetic (0.39) transcriptions.
AG showed a moderate decrease, from 0.58 on phonemic to
0.52 on phonetic transcriptions.
For all three algorithms also tested by [18] (TP, PUDDLE,
DiBS), the drop in model performance between the phonemic
and phonetic transcription was substantially smaller on infant-
directed speech than that reported for adult-directed speech.
3.3. 1/10 Corpus
On the 1/10 corpus, unsurprisingly, the algorithms were some-
what less successful at word segmentation than on the full cor-
pus. TP again showed no degradation, scoring slightly higher
on phonetic (0.30) than phonemic (0.29), and DiBS showed a
moderate drop from phonemic (0.34) to phonetic (0.30). The
notable exception was PUDDLE, which was highly resilient on
the full corpus, but dropped on the reduced corpus from 0.21 to
0.12. AG’s decrease was also somewhat larger than on the full
corpus, dropping 0.08, from 0.54 to 0.46, compared to a smaller
drop of 0.06 on the full corpus.
4. Discussion
The speech signal is continuous, and yet computational models
take as input speech that is discretized into dictionary transcrip-
tions, glossing over variations in pronunciations. One reason for
this choice is convenience; it is time-intensive and expensive to
encode pronunciation variation in a corpus. However, young in-
fants can hear differences in pronunciations. Additionally, this
variation in pronunciation itself can be systematic and thus pro-
vide useful information for many tasks that an infant needs to
accomplish. As such the most ecologically valid speech input
is the continuous acoustic signal. A growing number of models
segment words directly from the acoustic signal (e.g., [37, 38]),
but these are typically harder to interpret. In this paper, our
goal was to bridge the gap between the idealization and the eco-
logically valid acoustic signal, while retaining interpretability,
by comparing the performance of various algorithms on word
2975
segmentation when the input is phonemically or phonetically-
transcribed. Phonetic transcription retains pronunciation varia-
tion, and thus presents a more gradient, although still discretized
input representation.
The main question we asked is whether encoding phonetic
detail degrades word segmentation in infant-directed speech.
We were inspired by reports from [18] that all three algorithms
they tested (TP, DiBS, PUDDLE) degraded on phonetic tran-
scriptions of adult-directed speech, with an average drop of 0.12
in token F-score. On the PhonProv corpus of infant-directed
speech [8], PUDDLE and TP showed no degradation with pho-
netically transcribed input. For comparison, on adult-directed
speech PUDDLE and TP F-scores reduced by 0.23 and 0.04 re-
spectively ([18]). On the infant-directed speech corpus DiBS
showed only a moderate decrease of 0.07, compared to a 0.11
decrease on the Buckeye adult-directed speech corpus. Note
that for TP and PUDDLE, the drop in word segmentation per-
formance on the infant-directed speech corpus was within the
margin of variation from run to run. This raises the question
- Why might segmentation of infant-directed speech be more
resilient to phonetic detail?
We can rule out a few explanations. The differences in the
results between infant- and adult-directed speech likely do not
stem from the extent of variation encoded in the two corpora.
The Buckeye phonemic transcription used 14 vowel and 24 con-
sonant symbols, versus 21 vowel and 24 consonant in PhonProv.
Buckeye’s phonetic transcription used 22 vowel and 27 conso-
nant symbols, versus 21 vowel and 35 consonants in PhonProv.
Thus PhonProv had more vowel symbols in the phonemic cor-
pus and is not encoding less variation. For the most frequent
consonants in English [t, d, n, s, z], the number of canonical
variants and the distribution of all variants were comparable in
PhonProv and the Buckeye corpus ([8]).
The pattern of results across algorithms themselves sheds
light on why segmentation of infant-directed speech may be
more resilient to phonetic variation. Among the algorithms, TP
stands out as it actually improved when provided phonetically-
transcribed input. A potential explanation for this resilience
is that phonetic variation, by expanding the segment inventory,
makes bigrams that span a word boundary more distinguishable
from word-internal ones, effectively providing a richer signal.
A bigram analysis of the corpus is consistent with this interpre-
tation. The phonetic transcription contains 2025 unique bigram
types compared to 1318 in the phonemic transcription. Allo-
phonic variants, such as aspiration, flapping, and glottalization
split phonemic bigrams into multiple phonetic bigrams, many
of which are position-specific, that is, restricted to particular
positions within words. This increased positional specificity
may additionally make it easier to identify boundaries. This
benefit may be amplified in infant-directed speech, where the
smaller vocabulary means that word-internal bigrams are espe-
cially consistent and repetitive, making boundary-spanning bi-
grams stand out even more clearly.
PUDDLE also showed resilience on the full corpus but
dropped substantially on the 1/10 corpus, suggesting that its
lexicon-building strategy can absorb phonetic variability given
enough data, but not when both data and phonetic consistency
are limited. PUDDLE relies on building a lexicon of known
words and storing permitted edge bigrams. When the same
word appears in multiple phonetic forms, PUDDLE stores each
variant separately, fragmenting its lexicon. With the full infant-
directed speech corpus, the high frequency of common words
means that even multiple exemplars are each encountered often
enough to be stored. On the reduced corpus, this advantage dis-
appears. The high proportion of isolated single-word utterances
in infant-directed speech likely also helps, as these give PUD-
DLE free lexicon entries without requiring any segmentation.
In contrast to TP and PUDDLE, DiBS showed a moderate
drop of 0.07 on the full corpus with the phonetically-transcribed
input. DiBS estimates boundary probabilities from the distri-
bution of phones at utterance edges. Phonetic variation means
that the same underlying phone may appear in different surface
forms, diluting the frequency estimates that DiBS relies on. Un-
like TP, which benefits from an expanded inventory because it
makes relative comparisons between adjacent bigrams, DiBS
relies on absolute frequency estimates of individual phones at
utterance edges, and phonetic variation fragments these counts.
Although [18] probabilistically inserted utterance boundaries in
the Buckeye corpus to match the rate observed in infant-directed
speech, this does not replicate the natural distribution of utter-
ance length. In particula