Application context in speech synthesis evaluation: A problem and a solution
Fritz Seebauer ID 1, Markus Rothg¨anger ID 1, Sven Wachsmuth ID 1, Petra Wagner ID 1
1 Bielefeld University, Germany
fritz.seebauer@uni-bielefeld.de, mrothgaenger@techfak.de,
swachsmu@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de, petra.wagner@uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract
Advancements in research of synthetic speech can only be prop-
erly quantified and driven by well-proven evaluation proce-
dures, the most prevalent of which being the subjective listening
test. In this paper, the ecological validity of such tests is evalu-
ated empirically in an experiment comparing rating outcomes of
four synthetic speech systems across four different application
contexts. It is shown that, depending on the scenario in which
they are obtained, the ratings for a respective synthesis system
change significantly. Additionally, it is found that the impact
of the application also depends on the system in question, high-
lighting a potential confound in evaluations comparing systems
without a specified application context. Further, it is discov-
ered that ratings collected in a digital twin provide statistically
equivalent ratings to the ones obtained in a physical setting, sug-
gesting that simulation testing might prove a beneficial path to
achieving ecologically valid evaluations.
Index Terms: speech synthesis, evaluation, subjective test,
Bayesian statistics
1. Introduction
Despite the constant advancement of speech synthesis tech-
nology, the most commonly employed evaluation techniques
are still constrained to single-scale absolute category ratings
(ACR), often aggregated as mean opinion scores (MOS) col-
lected for isolated sentences [1]. In light of mounting evidence
suggesting that modern speech synthesis systems have reached
human parity in this type of approach [2, 3, 4], it has been sug-
gested that TTS evaluation needs to look beyond this method-
ology and implement more contextualised approaches [5, 6].
Evaluating synthetic systems in their intended application in-
creases the ecological validity of the obtained measures and has
been recommended in early reviews, standards and textbooks,
even though common practice still sees systems compared in a
“neutral” or unspecified setting [7, 8, 9]. The notion that a neu-
tral evaluation yields merit is, at least to a degree, founded on
the idea that evaluation is modular, meaning that the quality of a
system as a whole can be described as a linear transformation of
the quality of its sub-components. This modularity of quality is
explicitly highlighted as a desirable property for the concept of
Quality of Experience (QoE) [10] and has also been proposed
for synthetic speech in [11, 12]. It remains to be shown, how-
ever, whether this desire actually conforms to real-world data,
or rather, the quality perception of synthetic speech is inher-
ently co-determined by the context in which it is being judged.
In this paper, we present a perception study to test the validity
of the claim that synthetic speech quality, as queried by stan-
dard rating scales, can be treated as independent of its intended
application context by carrying out a joint evaluation of four
text-to-speech (TTS) systems across four in-person application
scenarios. Further, as more ecologically valid testing is usually
associated with an increase in needed resources [13, 14, 15], a
potential solution of conducting evaluations in a simulated vir-
tual reality (VR) environment is also investigated.
2. Background
The proposition that evaluation of synthetic speech should be
carried out with regard to its intended application derives from
common definitions of synthetic speech quality. This includes
both the conceptualisation of speech (synthesis) quality pre-
sented in [16] or the later designation of QoE [17], as well
as adjacent concepts such as User Experience (UX) [18]. All
of the cited definitions include a perceptual judgement by hu-
man listeners that is predicated on an expectation conditioned
by contextual factors, typically including the intended use case
[16, 19]. Aside from these theoretical considerations, there ex-
ists some evidence for synthetic speech ratings differing based
on the length of the listening stimuli and inclusion of surround-
ing informational content, indicating that there might be a po-
tential confound if different use cases were to vary with re-
spect to these factors [20, 21, 22, 23]. Specifically investigat-
ing a difference in application, [24] showed that both explicit
framing of the question and implicit framing through the spo-
ken content significantly impact outcome ratings of evaluating
appropriateness. A similar result is found in [25] regarding a
change in question targetingappropriatenessin conversation
or read speech and [26] regarding a difference inappropriate-
nessof synthetic voices for non-social and social applications.
Finally, [15] determined that conversational factors like turn-
taking seemed to outweigh the system and session level differ-
ences for the MOS in a study containing three TTS systems, em-
bedded in a dialogue agent setting. To our knowledge, none of
the existing work has tested whether the same synthesis system
is perceived differently in varying applications within the same
study and beyond global questions likeappropriateness. There
are only two exceptions: The first is found in [27], who did com-
pare a single dialogue setting to a neutral online rating scenario,
but not comparing different applications. And [28] conducted
two case studies showing how application-specific testing could
be simulated using different methods, but did not carry out a
crossed statistical design with the same testing methodology, as
is done here. From this review, we therefore derive two research
questions:
RQ1: “Do application-specific factors influence the perception or
interpretation measured through the outcome ratings of a
standard synthetic speech evaluation?”
RQ2: “Does this change extend beyond overall judgements to qual-
ity aspects associated with the synthesis system itself?”
2504
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-747
The question of whether VR testing can reliably substitute in-
person evaluation has, to the best of our knowledge, also not
yet been explored for speech synthesis. In the field of audiol-
ogy, some evidence exists, however, indicating that perception
of noise, audio quality and speech intelligibility might, indeed,
be judged differently depending on modelling parameters of the
virtual environment [29, 30, 31]. On the other hand [32, 33]
both find similar distributions of test results for QoE and “hear-
ing in noise” to a normative benchmark of healthy populations.
Given the scarce evidence on this topic, we formulate the re-
search question:
RQ3: “Does synthetic speech evaluation in virtual reality yield sta-
tistically comparable results to evaluation in real application
scenarios?”
3. Methods
For the perception experiment, 80 participants (16m/23f/1nb-
physical, 18m/21f/1nb-virtual) were recruited through conve-
nience sample at the local university. All participants reported
their native language to be German and were compensated for
their time. In total, four different tasks were designed in an ef-
fort to cover a diverse range of the most prevalent application
scenarios for synthetic speech. Task 1 (T1) consisted of a learn-
ing task in a dialogue scenario, where participants were given
instructions to prepare for a fictitious test using the provided
dialogue system. In Task 2 (T2), the human individuals were
asked to find 5 different objects hidden throughout the testing
area. They were instructed by a simulated dialogue system in a
Wizard-of-Oz setup using pre-recorded prompts. This mimics a
navigation scenario, and interaction with the speech system was
ensured by instructing participants to find the items in a pre-
specified order, which was only known by the dialogue agent.
Task 3 (T3) was designed as a free dialogue scenario where
participants could have an open conversation of 5 minutes in
length. Finally, Task 4 (T4) consisted of listening to a read short
story, which had been pre-synthesised and was played to the
participants in a stationary setting. Following the taxonomy of
dialogue systems in [34], the presented tasks, therefore, cover
all cases oftask-oriented,conversationalandquestion and an-
swer. Each participant took part in all four tasks in the same set
order, with four different synthetic speech systems being rotated
in a Latin square between participants. The systems consisted
of: Tacotron2 [35] with wavenet vocoder [36] (S1), VITS [37]
as a common end-to-end encoder decoder architecture (S2), Au-
ralis TTS [38] a commercial variant of XTTS-V2 [39] (S3)
and Orpheus [40], another commercial LLM-based TTS system
trained to predict the neural codec SNAC [41] (S4). S1 and S2
were trained on the Thorsten dataset [42], while for S3 and S4,
pre-trained German implementations with unknown data were
used, as distinguishing between voice and architecture is of sec-
ondary concern in this study. For the dialogue system, a simple,
locally hosted, architecture of ASR [43], LLM [44] 1, and the
varying synthesis systems was employed, with small additions
of barge-in functionality and a separate tracking of the conver-
sation history to be fed back to the LLM. The average user-
to-system turn-transition time amounted to 1.07 s. The experi-
ment in real life was carried out in a mock apartment designed
for interaction studies [45]. For the simulated VR condition, a
digital twin of this mock apartment was generated in the soft-
ware Unreal Engine 5 [46]. The software’s internal algorithms
were used to model sound propagation and occlusion similar to
1In the 24 billion weights variant
Figure 1:Example of the VR setup condition for T2, overlayed
with the digital twin in which the participants interacted with
the synthetic voice agent.
the playback device locations in the physical apartment. The
VR environment was presented through a Meta Quest 3 head-
mounted display (HMD) [47] and in both conditions, the par-
ticipant’s sound was captured through a wireless cardioid con-
denser head-mounted microphone, to allow for movement dur-
ing T2. After each of the tasks, the participants were asked to
provide a rating of their experience with the synthesis system
on itsOverall qualityandListening effort, each queried with
a single item. Additionally, they were asked to rate the sys-
tem with regard toNaturalness,Pleasantness,Speech melody,
Audio artefacts,Extraversion,Negative emotion, each queried
with 2 scale items. Each rating was provided on a 100-point
visual digital scale with anchors at the 20% and 80% marks,
and the quality traits were chosen based on the works in [48]
and [49], who investigated different perceptual aspects of syn-
thetic speech quality. Finally, the human raters also completed
the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) in its short-form ver-
sion, yielding ratings on the aspects ofpragmaticusability and
hedonicappeal [50, 51].
3.1. Model
For the analysis, we compute a Bayesian hierarchical statistical
model to verify the potential influence of the application setting
and its interaction with the systems under investigation on the
outcome ratings. The multivariate model is specified as follows:
yi∼N(µ i,Σ)(1)
µi = [µk
i,...µ K
i ](2)
µk
i =β k
0 +β k
1 Ti +β k
2 Si +β k
3 (Ti×S i) +u k
part[i] (3)
K={Overall Quality,...,Pleasantness}(4)
whereKdenotes the different target quality variables that get
estimated with a multivariate covariance matrixΣ. T and S sig-
nify the sum-coded contrasts for task and system, respectively.
β1 denotes the linear parameter estimated for an effect of the
task,β 2 the effect of the system andβ 3 of the interaction. Fi-
nally,u k
part[i] is a participant-level random effect that was also
2505
estimated jointly across the multivariate responses. The priors
are chosen as weakly informative regarding the expected stan-
dard deviation for system and listener, observing the data of past
rating endeavours in the BVCC [52]. Additionally, the range
equalising effect on MOS ratings observed in [53] informs the
prior assumption that the mean rating would fall roughly in the
middle of the scale. The priors are therefore defined as follows:
uk
part∼N(0,σ k
part)(5)
βk
0∼N(50,20)(6)
βk
j∼N(0,10)j∈{1,2,3}(7)
σk
part∼Exponential(0.1)(8)
σk∼Exponential(0.1)(9)
R∼LKJ(2)(10)
where R denotes the correlation matrix component ofΣ,σ k
the response-specific residual scale parameter and LKJ(2)de-
scribes a Lewandowski–Kurowicka–Joe [54] prior with shape
parameterη= 2. To investigate RQ3, whether the evaluation
in VR yields comparable results, a second model was computed
using the coded VR and physical setting as a predictor instead of
the task. Both models were estimated using Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo in the form implemented in thebrmspackage [55] and
showed good chain convergence ˆR≤1.01. Additionally, sam-
pling efficiency was high, with minimum bulk effective sample
size (ESS)≥1800and tail ESS exceeding1400across param-
eters. These diagnostics indicate that the model fit was stable
across multiple different sampling chains and provides a reli-
able approximation of the Bayesian posterior distribution of the
data in question [56].
4. Results
The results will be reported separately for the different research
questions. First, we will investigate the effect of different appli-
cation scenarios on the outcome ratings (RQ1). Then it will be
reported if the effect differs between quality dimensions (RQ2).
Finally, it will be investigated if the obtained VR data is differ-
ent from the parallel physical ratings (RQ3).
4.1. Influence of application context (RQ1 & RQ2)
A semantic differential profile for the different application con-
texts, for all quality aspects, averaged over systems, can be sur-
veyed in Fig. 2. The collected raw data exhibits seemingly clear
differences between the tasks, especially in the navigation sce-
nario, which tends to be rated higher in almost all dimensions.
The effect is markedly more pronounced in the pragmatic part
of the UEQ, but still noticeable in the synthetic speech quality
dimensions. The other tasks are rated very cohesively, albeit
the conversation setting (T3) seems to govern slightly lower
ratings in the UEQ questions, while the story task (T4) leads
to slightly higher ratings in the synthetic quality dimensions,
over (T1) and (T3). To confirm these observations a Region
Of Practical Equivalence (ROPE) analysis [57] was carried out
for each of the differences between applications using the com-
puted Bayesian model. Two regions of equivalence were deter-
mined a priori: A 10-point difference (±5) constituting a prag-
matic minimal significant change of 10% on a 100-point scale,
and a 20-point difference (±10) corresponding to one whole
step if the scale were to be transformed into 5 equally spaced
bins, such as in common ACR questionnaires. Evaluating over-
lap of the 95% credible interval with the±10ROPE, it was
Figure 2:Semantic differential profile for each of the differ-
ent applications, averaged over synthesis systems with 95%
confidence intervals. The background colour denotes synthetic
speech quality scales (blue), UEQ (red) and overall quality (yel-
low).
found that T2 was rated significantly higher inOverall Quality
over T1 (CrI = [12.34, 21.33]) and T3 (CrI = [10.04, 18.90]).
It was further rated higher inListening Effortover T4 (CrI =
[9.921, 19.421]). In the more lax±5equivalence definition, the
higher ratings in T2 also extend toIntonationover T1 (CrI =
[-16.396, -7.521]) and T3 (CrI = [-14.973, -6.073]) as well as
Naturalnessover T1 (CrI= [-15.436, -7.817]) and T3 (CrI = [-
11.863, -4.202]). Finally, there is also a significant difference in
Naturalnessfound between T4 and T1 (CrI = [-12.172, -4.401]).
In summary, it is therefore confirmed by the model that the nav-
igation task T2 was rated more favourably on the dimensions of
Overall Quality,Listening effortandNaturalness, whereas the
differences between the other conditions were largely inconclu-
sive. While this is a relevant insight, a more pressing evaluative
concern is how this shift in ratings interacts with the systems
under investigation, i.e., whether the differences between sys-
tems change, depending on the application context.
The application differences in ratings between systems for
which the HDI is 95% outside the more strict±10ROPE can be
found in Tab. 1. For clarification, the first line reads as the differ-
ence of ratings inListening effortbetween T1 and T4 changing
from S3 to S2 with a credible interval of−37.82to−10.69,
being fully outside the region of equivalence from−10to+10.
As is evident, more of these differences can be found, regarding
the quality dimensions ofIntonation,Audio QualityandPleas-
antness. There are, however, also quality dimensions which
are found to be fully equivalent, with an overlap of the HDI
>95%. These dimensions are the UEQ pragmatic and hedonic
scales, as well as perceivedExtraversionin most contrast com-
binations. Equivalence is also found forNaturalnessin 5 and
Negative Emotionfor 3 out of the 36 possible contrasts. There
are, however, also fully divergent combinations found for the
latter dimensions in the less strict±5ROPE, e.g. forNatural-
ness(T1-T3 & S4-S1, CrI = [-25.73, -2.81]).
2506
Quality dimension Task & System∆HDI CrI ROPE %
Listening effort T1 - T4 & S3 - S2 [-37.821, -10.692] 0.000
Intonation T3 - T2 & S3 - S1 [11.097, 36.118] 0.000
Intonation T3 - T2 & S3 - S2 [11.449, 37.666] 0.000
Intonation T2 - T4 & S3 - S4 [-39.721, -12.948] 0.000
Intonation T2 - T4 & S3 - S1 [-37.050, -11.529] 0.000
Intonation T2 - T4 & S3 - S2 [-37.296, -11.495] 0.000
Audio Quality T1 - T4 & S3 - S4 [7.913, 32.093] 0.029
Pleasantness T3 - T1 & S1 - S2 [11.745, 38.382] 0.000
Table 1:Percentage of ROPE±10overlap for the difference
between system and task contrasts based on posterior draws.
4.2. Influence of virtual reality setting (RQ3)
Fig. 3 shows the computed posterior distribution for differences
in ratings between the real world and VR evaluations. Observ-
ing the percentage of overlap of the HDI with pre-specified
ROPE, it becomes evident that the ratings were largely equiva-
lent between the two conditions. This finding does not extend
to the scales ofListening effort,Negative EmotionandAudio
Qualityin the±5equivalence definition, however, albeit their
distribution differences are still fully within the±10ROPE.
Distinguishing beyond the averages shown in the figure and
examining differences for each given TTS system, the results
become less clear. While still largely equivalent in the±10
ROPE, in the more conservative ROPE±5only the scales
ofUEQ-Hedonic(CrI = [-5.31 3.90]) andUEQ-Pragmatic
(CrI = [-6.32, 5.24]) are fully equivalent for the difference
in S4. AdditionallyExtraversion, yields equivalent ratings
for S4 (CrI = [-5.77, 5.09]) and S2 (CrI = [-6.29, 4.54]).
All other differences in ratings between the conditions per
system, for the more strict equivalence definition±5, fall
in the inconclusive region between 95% and 5% overlap.
None are, however, being found fully outside the equiva-
lence region, with a minimum of 26% overlap forNaturalness
in S4 and a median of 75% showing a tendency for equivalence.
5. Discussion & Conclusion
This work examined three discrete research questions relevant
to the field of speech synthesis. Starting with RQ1, the pre-
sented data not only clearly suggests that the application in
which a synthesis system is being tested influences the outcome
ratings systematically, especially in the case of the navigation
task, but more importantly, that this influence is also dependent
on the system under investigation. Seeing that the aim of evalu-
ation is commonly to highlight differences in systems [58], this
posits a major potential confound, as the differences might vary
depending on the implicit or explicit application context and the
quality dimension that is queried. Our experiment, therefore,
confirms and extends the previous findings of [24, 25] where the
listeners’ expectation was purely induced through the phrasing
of the question or content. Addressing RQ2, it can be stated
that the change in ratings governed through different applica-
tion scenarios could only be verified for some aspects of syn-
thesis quality, namelyIntonation,Audio QualityandPleasant-
ness, whereas the results for the more prevalent scale ofOver-
all qualitywere found to be inconclusive. Note, however, that
there was also no indication of the latter scale being equivalent
across the different applications, so care should still be taken
when applying it out of context. The findings with regard to the
scales of the UEQ,Extraversionand to a degreeNaturalness,
Figure 3:Estimated posterior difference in ratings between VR
and physical settings. Points mark the median, and lines be-
low each distribution denote the 95% HDI. The shaded bands
signify ROPEs of±5and±10, and the colour-coded percent-
ages report overlap of the HDI of the posterior with each of the
equivalence regions.
on the other hand, suggest consistent ratings across the different
tasks, or if a systematic shift in judgements was present, that it
was the same for each of the investigated systems. This seems
to be in line with expectations that, for example, appropriate
speech melody is more dependent on the context, whereas the
perceived personality traits of a voice should be relatively sta-
ble. It is surprising, however, that the UEQ dimensions which
capture more general concepts about the technology as a whole
were found to change similarly across systems, while varying
strongly between applications. A possible explanation being
that the concepts queried through the UEQ are rather broad and
only pertain to the application itself, thusly being, to a degree,
invariant to the synthesis system which is employed within the
application. Considering the magnitude of the effect, the re-
sults demonstrate that the influence of the application can span
beyond 20 points on a 100-point scale, making it more salient
than, for example, the subjective listener-specific variation re-
ported by [59]. Regarding RQ3, the results indicate that the
evaluation of synthetic speech in VR is indeed promising, with
all quality aspects butNegative emotion, yielding equivalent rat-
ings in the broader equivalence definition of±10and, averaged
over systems, even in the narrow definition of±5scale-points,
except for the scales ofNegative Emotion,Listening effortand
Audio Quality. While the difference in ratings with regard to the
negative emotion has no straightforward explanation, the latter
two could potentially be explained by the different playback de-
vices used across conditions: While the VR was being presented
over a HMD, the physical experiment used speakers. These ten-
tative findings of equivalence are promising for future testing,
as VR evaluation has many desirable properties: reduced setup
cost in ecologically valid evaluation settings, ease of switching
participants between different application contexts, or increased
control over the listening environment and recorded parameters.
2507
6. Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support by the project
“SAIL: SustAInable Life-cycle of Intelligent Socio-Technical
Systems” (Grant ID NW21-059A), which is funded by the pro-
gram “Netzwerke 2021” of the Ministry of Culture and Science
of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia (Germany)
7. Use of Generative AI Disclosure
The paper was checked for grammatical and punctuation errors
using a grammar tool based on generative AI. All scientific con-
tent, as well as the original writing, was conceived by the au-
thors.