Masculinity and Sexual Orientation as Predictors of f0 Variation in the Speech 
of Australian English Speaking Men  
Timothy Shea1, Hannah White2, Joshua Penney1, Anita Szakay1, Felicity Cox1 
1 Macquarie University, Department of Linguistics 
2 Institute of Phonetics and Speech Processing, LMU Munich 
timothy.shea@mq.edu.au, hannah.white@lmu.de, joshua.penney@mq.edu.au, 
anita.szakay@mq.edu.au, felicity.cox@mq.edu.au 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The effect of sexual orientation (SO) on the fundamental 
frequency of men's voices has been widely studied since the 
late twentieth century. Less widely studied has been the effect 
on fundamental frequency of men's orientations towards 
traditional masculinity, and no study has yet investigated the 
impact of either of these variables in the Australian English 
(AusE) context. 
Presented here are the results of an examination of the effect 
of SO and orientation toward masculinity on three f0-derived 
variables, using speech data elicited from 77 male speakers of 
AusE. Referential topic (LGBTQ vs neutral) was also 
investigated. Results demonstrated that none of these 
independent variables significantly impacted local f0, but that 
SO, orientation toward masculinity and topic all affected f0 
dynamicity, and SO and topic both affected f0 range. In all 
cases, however, these effects occurred in complex interactions 
with each other and with speaker age. 
Index Terms: sexual orientation, fundamental frequency, 
masculinity, sociophonetics, topic-based style shifting 
1. Introduction 
1.1. Phonetics and Male Sexual Orientation 
Scholarly investigation of phonetic variation according to male 
sexual orientation (SO) is a relatively recent line of enquiry, 
having begun in earnest in the 1990s [1, 2], though in the 
subsequent decades the field has produced a wide-ranging and 
detailed body of research. Among the many phonetic variables 
that have been examined in this context, differences in pitch 
stand out as perhaps the most frequently considered [3, 4, 5, 6]. 
However, despite the prevalence of these variables in the 
literature, the findings have not resulted in any overwhelming 
consensus as to their relationship with different SO groups. 
Local fundamental frequency (f0), the acoustic correlate of 
pitch, has in most cases failed to be linked to SO, though gay 
Belgian speakers of Dutch were found to speak, on average, 
with a higher f0 than their straight counterparts [3]. Some 
studies have, however, found that listeners rate speakers as 
sounding more gay in higher pitch guises [4, 5, 6], but note [1, 
7]. 
In contrast, greater dynamicity in f0, that is, a greater rate 
of change in f0,  has been observed more frequently to be a 
marker of gay men’s speech compared to local f0. This has been 
reported in the voices of French speaking gay men when 
compared to French speaking straight men [8], and in German 
speaking gay men when compared to straight German speaking 
men [9]. f0 range has also been examined as a marker of SO, 
for example by [10], who described one speaker’s use of 
falsetto to index his gay identity, although it must be noted that 
this was the case only in one specific social context, and that it 
was the result of multiple orders of indexicality , with this 
particular social meaning stemming first from the speaker’s 
indexing of certain impermanent affective stances and, from 
those, a persona specific to that particular social context. 
Two points must be noted. First, while the work cited here 
represents some of the most seminal and influential in the field 
of the sociophonetics of SO, there also exists a wealth of other 
important studies too numerous to elaborate upon which have 
made invaluable contributions to the field [11, 12, 13]. Second, 
in many cases there are methodological differences between 
studies in terms of, for example, target populations, sample 
sizes, speech elicitation tasks, and data types, and this fact must 
be kept in mind when interpreting differences in findings. 
1.2. Masculinity 
1.2.1. Hegemonic Masculinity 
Contemporaneous with the late-twentieth-century interest in the 
sociophonetics of SO was the entrenchment of hegemonic 
masculinity as the dominant academic theoretical explanation 
of masculinity [14]. While this theory concedes space for the 
precise nature of the masculine hegemony to differ from culture 
to culture, it conceptualises the primary form of masculinity in 
the typical Western context as a construct which places social 
pressure on men to avoid effeminacy, expressions of emotion 
other than anger, and (among other behaviours) associations 
with homosexuality, and which imposes harsh social penalties 
for failing to do so. 
1.2.2. Masculinity and Sociophonetic Variation 
Given these misogynist constraints on male behaviour, it 
follows that hegemonic masculinity proscribes men from 
adopting feminine speech styles, such as higher f0 and 
increased f0 variation compared to men . Numerous 
sociophonetic studies have investigated the relevance of 
masculinity to speech variation. These include several 
perception studies in which speech perceived as gay has also 
been perceived as less masculine [1, 7, 15]. However, while 
[16] notes the indexical power of pitch in certain contexts, 
stating that “(w)hen men wish to become ‘more masculine’, 
they will often lower the pitch of their voice”, in production 
studies a robust relationship between masculinity and pitch has 
been more elusive, with [9] failing to observe such an effect. 
3685
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1906
However, citing [17], [18] observed that “men with higher 
scores on the femininity/expressivity scale have higher mean 
f0… than men with lower scores” (p. 14). Given these varied 
results, the question arises as to whether or not men who ascribe 
to the tenets of hegemonic masculinity do in fact speak in a 
lower pitch. 
1.3. Topic Based Style Shifting 
Another variable which may affect speech, although this time 
at the intra-speaker level, is topic-based style shifting. This 
refers to variation according to referential topic. For example, 
evidence exists that a certain gay speaker varied his /t/ 
production when moving between gay-themed topics and others 
[19], but that gay speakers do not all vary their speech 
identically [20]. 
1.4 The Australian English Context 
Inter-speaker variation in Australian English (AusE) has been 
studied from the perspective of a number of demographic 
variables. Most typically, these variables have historically been 
sociostylistic [21] and, more recently, ethnocultural [22]. 
However, SO has hitherto fore seldom been considered among 
these demographic variables. Accordingly, the study described 
in this paper investigates the role of male SO as a predictor of 
several f0-related dependent variables (DVs) and, in doing so, 
adds to recent efforts to address this lacuna (for example [23] 
on /s/ and [24] on creak). The effects of hegemonic masculinity 
and of speech topic on these DVs are also considered. 
2. Aims 
The goal of this study was to determine the extent to which both 
speaker SO and, as a proxy for hegemonic masculinity, speaker 
attitude towards traditional male gender roles affected three f0-
related phonetic variables. Three predictions were made. 
1. Neither SO nor degree of alignment with traditional 
male gender roles will significantly affect local fundamental 
frequency [1]. 
2. Gay and Bi + men will speak with greater f0 
dynamicity than straight men; men whose attitudes align 
closely with tradtional male gender roles will exhibit less f0 
dynamicity than those whose attitudes align with them less 
closely. [8, 9] 
3. Gay and Bi + men will speak with a greater f0 range 
than straight men; men whose attitudes align closely with 
traditional male gender roles will exhibit lower f0 ranges than 
those whose attitudes align with them less closely [8]. 
3. Methods 
3.1. Participants 
Data were collected comprising speech samples from 77 adults 
who identified as men, who reported no speech or hearing 
problems and who were speakers of AusE. This last criterion 
was operationalised by restricting participation to individuals 
who had received all primary and secondary schooling in 
Australia. Speakers ranged in age from 18 to 52 years (mean = 
30.4). 27 speakers were gay, 38 were straight, and 12 reported 
different SOs, for example “bisexual”, “pansexual” or “queer”. 
3.2. Data Collection 
3.2.1. Speech Data 
Speech samples were collected during one-on-one data 
collection sessions conducted in quiet locations by the first 
author, recorded using a Zoom H6 Portable Recorder at a 
sampling frequency of 44.1 kHz. All data analysed here were 
elicited via a picture description task, wherein the participant 
described the contents of a series of nine photographs, the first 
six of which were selected because they were taken to depict 
subjects that were neutral with regard to SO, while the final 
three were selected because the ir subjects were LGBTQ 
themed. 
3.2.2. Survey Data 
Following the data collection session, participant s first 
completed a demographic questionnaire, which elicited inter 
alia their date of birth and SO. The former was used to divide 
the sample into two age brackets: 30 and under (N= 45), and 
over 30 (N= 32). The latter was operationalised by asking 
“What is your sexual orientation?” and providing three radio 
buttons labelled “gay”, “straight” and “other”. Any participant 
selecting “other” was presented with a field into which he was 
asked to type his specific SO; examples included “bisexual”, 
“pansexual” and “queer”. While it had been hoped that this 
group could be analysed separately from the gay speakers, its 
limited distribution through the age range necessitated 
collapsing SO into a binary variable consisting of gay and bi + 
(30 and under = 21; over 30 = 18) and straight (30 and under = 
24; over 30 = 14). Participants were also asked to characterise 
their gender identity as either transgender or cisgender; only 
one participant (in the 30 and under age bracket) reported a 
transgender gender identity. 
Participants then responded to a series of survey items 
included to measure their orientation towards hegemonic 
masculinity. The precise number of items varied depending on 
the participant’s SO, but for the purposes of this paper only 
eight items are relevant. All 77 participants responded to these 
eight items, which prompted them to rate their level of 
agreement with a statement related to traditional male gender 
roles on a six-point Likert scale (a higher score corresponded to 
greater accordance with a traditional male gender role), and 
which together comprised the standardised Male Roles Attitude 
Scale (MRAS) [25]. Each participant’s mean rating for these 
eight items was calculated and the resultant numbers z-scored, 
to become a variable hereafter labelled MRAS Score. A higher 
MRAS score thus indicated greater agreement with traditional 
male gender roles. 
3.3. Data Preparation 
Speech data were prepared for analysis by filtering to include 
only vowels and sonorant consonants, then removing hesitation 
markers (e.g. “ums” and “ahs”). The data were then processed 
through MacReaper [26, 27], which calculates the time between 
each Glottal Closure Instant (GCI ). These times were 
subsequently used to calculate local f0 estimates at ten 
millisecond intervals. 
Next, pauses of 200 ms or greater were identified and used 
to demarcate “utterances”. Beginning with the first f0 estimate 
in each utterance, the absolute value of the difference between 
every fifth estimate within each utterance was calculated. The 
decision of every fifth estimate was arrived at because it 
represented a time interval short enough that fluctuations in f0 
would not be skipped, but not so short that cycle-to-cycle GCI 
variation such as jitter would be picked up. 
Finally, the range of values in Hz of the f0 estimates within 
each utterance was measured. 
3.4. Data Analysis 
Results were analysed using linear mixed effects regression 
models, all of which featured a random slope for topic on a 
random intercept for speaker. Three models were considered: 
one for each of three dependent variables (DVs). These DVs 
were local f0, constituted by the values in Hz of the local f0 
estimates, f0 differences, comprised of the differences in Hz 
between every fifth f0 estimate, and f0 range, consisting of the 
range in Hz of f0 estimates in each utterance. For each DV, the 
most parsimonious model was arrived at using a model 
3686
simplification process. This process began with a fixed effects 
structure consisting of four three-way interactions, each 
containing three of the four independent variables being 
considered: SO, MRAS Score, Age Bracket, and topic. This 
complex model was then incrementally simplified by removing 
the highest-order non-significant interaction with the highest p-
value (or, if no interaction was present, the non-significant 
simple fixed effect with the highest p-value) until all remaining 
effects and interactions were significant. At each stage of the 
reduction process a Likelihood Ratio test was also run on the 
resulting model and the previous one to check whether that 
more complex previous one had in fact been a significantly 
better fit. 
  
4. Results 
4.1. Local f0 
Regarding local f0, only a single, simple fixed effect attained 
significance, that being age bracket, with the predicted f0 of the 
over 30 group being lower than that of the 30 and under 
reference level (Est = -7.327, SE = 3.227, t = -2.27, p = 0.026). 
This effect is visualised in Figure 1; in this and all other graphs 
each cross represents the mean value for one of the 77 speakers. 
It is notable that, in support of our first prediction, neither SO 
nor MRAS Score significantly affected speaker f0. 
 
Figure 1: Effect of Age Bracket on local f0. 
4.2. f0 Differences 
The fixed effects structure of the final model for the second DV 
f0 differences featured three separate significant two-way 
interactions. While, for speakers 30 and under MRAS Score did 
not appear to significantly affect f0 differences, for speakers 
over 30 f0 differences decreased with increasing MRAS Score 
(Est = -2.805, SE. = 0.840, t = -3.340, p = 0.001). For the 30 
and under age bracket gay and bi + speakers exhibited greater 
f0 diffferences than straight speakers, while the reverse was true 
for the over 30 age bracket (Est = 3.219, SE. = 1.493, t = 2.156, 
p = 0.034). Gay and Bi + speakers exhibited greater f0 
differences in the LGBTQ topic condition than the neutral topic 
condition, while this was not so for straight speakers  (Est = 
0.979, SE. = 0.372, t = 2.632, p = 0.010). Illustrations of these 
three significant interactions are presented in Figure 2, Figure 
3, and Figure 4 respectively.  
 
Figure 2: Effect of MRAS Score on f0 Diffs by age. 
Additionally, post-hoc comparisons of estimated marginal 
means were run on interactions involving binary categorical 
variables. None of these comparisons for the age bracket*SO 
interaction was significant.  
 
Figure 3: Effect of SO on f0 diffs by Age. 
In contrast, for topic*SO these posthoc comparisons 
confirmed that the gay and bi + speakers’ lower f0 differences 
when speaking on neutral topics compared with LGBTQ topics 
did in fact contitute a significant contrast (p = 0.005). There was 
no significant difference by topic for straight speakers. 
 
Figure 4: Effect of topic & SO on f0 diffs. 
3687
4.3. f0 Range 
With respect to the third DV, f0 range, the final model included 
a sole significant two-way interaction in its fixed effects 
structure. This significant interaction was between topic and SO 
(Est = 4.345, SE. = 2.130, t = 2.040, p = 0.046), and appeared 
to show the gay and bi + speakers exhibiting greater f0 ranges 
in the LGBTQ topic condition than the neutral one, and the 
straight speakers failing to exhibit such a difference. This two-
way interaction between topic and SO is depicted in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5: Effect of Topic & SO on f0 range. 
Once again, post hoc pairwise comparisons were conducted on 
this interaction., and did confirm that f0 range was significantly 
greater in the LGBTQ topic compared to the neutral topic for 
Gay and Bi + speakers only  (p  <0.001). 
 
5. Discussion 
5.1. Interactions with Age Bracket 
On inspection of these results, one thing that is clear is that 
phonetic variation according to male SO cannot be distilled to 
anything so simple as gay and bi + men speaking in a higher 
pitch and with greater pitch variability than straight men. As 
regards local f0, consistent with our predictions, neither men’s 
SO nor their orientation toward hegemonic masculinity impact 
the pitch in which they speak. The sole demographic feature for 
which such as an effect was observed was age, and pitch 
lowering with age (at least within the age range of our 
participants) is an expected phenomenon which is well 
documented in the phonetic literature [28, 29]. 
However, with respect to dynamicity in f0, among the older 
age group, as alignment with traditional male gender roles 
increases, dynamicity in f0 decreases. Such an effect is not 
observed among the younger age bracket. 
The picture that here emerges is that speakers in the older 
age bracket speak in a lower pitch compared with their younger 
counterparts and, the more they fall in line with the edicts of 
hegemonic masculinity, the less dynamic their pitch and less 
expressive their speech. This effect is a logical one: hegemonic 
masculinity dictates that men distance themselves from 
anything seen as feminine. But why then is this effect observed 
only in the older age bracket? We might surmise that 
increasingly liberal attitudes towards gender over time have led 
to members of that younger group growing up in an 
environment in which the pressure to behave ‘like a man’ is less 
powerful than it was in earlier decades. This does not, however, 
explain why there are still many participants in the 30 and under 
age bracket with high MRAS Scores; rather, it merely seems 
that these younger men whose values adhere closely to 
traditional male gender roles do not feel the need to distinguish 
themselves from other men of their age group with more 
progressive attitudes towards gender roles by monotonising 
their speech.  
5.2. Interactions with Topic 
We observed that gay and bi + speakers spoke with greater f0 
dynamicity and that their utterances exhibited greater overall f0 
range after they switched to speaking about LGBTQ topics 
compared with when speaking on topics which were neutral as 
regards SO. Importantly, straight speakers did not exhibit such 
a change when shifting from one topic to the other. 
The fact that these effects are conditional upon speaker SO 
suggests that expansion of f0 range and increase in f0 
fluctuations are employed by gay and bi + speakers for specific 
indexical purposes. Given the context, it may well be the case 
that this purpose is to convey a sense of solidarity or 
identification with the LGBTQ subject matter of the 
photographs they are describing. Taking this explanation a step 
further, the shift in speech to a style in which they are more 
expressive [10, 30] and closer to what is considered a feminine 
manner of speaking may suggest a greater level of comfort 
indexing their gay or bi + identity as a result of identification 
with the LGBTQ topic. 
Beyond their contribution to the  expansion of scholarly 
understanding of AusE variation, it is anticipated that our 
research will have practical utility, such as forensic applications 
and the promotion of cultural sensitivity. 
5.3. Future Directions 
One question that arises from the results of the f0 change 
DV is to what extent these changes in f0 result from speakers 
moving into creaky voice from modal voice and vice versa, and 
to what extent they result from speakers varying their pitch 
within their modal voice frequency range. Additionally, future 
studies might seek to further illuminate precisely what stances 
or personae are being indexed when gay and bi + speakers 
increase their changes in f0 and f0 ranges when describing 
LGBTQ themed pictures. 
 
6. Conclusions 
We examined the speech of 77 Australian English speaking 
men in terms of their local f0, f0 change, and f0 range with the 
aim of identifying any effects of their SO and their orientation 
toward masculinity. In doing so we observed that men over 30 
exhibited lower local f0 than those aged 30 and under, that those 
men aged over 30 spoke with less f0 dynamicity the more their 
values were influenced by hegemonic masculinity, while those 
aged thirty and under did not, and a complex interaction of 
effects of SO and age bracket on f0 changes. We also noted that 
gay and bi + men spoke with greater f0 changes and greater f0 
ranges when describing LGBTQ topics than neutral topics, and 
that the change in topic did not lead to any difference in these 
metrics in the voices of straight men. 
The complexity of these results suggest exciting  
opportunities for further research, to tease apart the roles played 
in speech variation by intersecting identities, multiple levels of 
indexicality, and differing social contexts. One thing that seems 
apparent, however, is that Australia’s gay and bi + men, far 
from being a monolithic speech community, much like wider 
Australian society, exhibit a rich diversity of speech styles. 
7. Acknowledgements 
This research was supported by Australian Research Council 
Future Fellowship Grant FT180100462 to the fifth author and 
by RTP Scholarship Allocation Number  20191103 to the firsst 
author. The authors wish to thank our speakers for providing 
3688
their time and voices to this study. We also thank the Phonetics 
Lab at for regular feedback on study design and data analysis.  
8. Generative AI Disclosure 
No AI was used in the collection or analysis of data, in the 
composition of prose, nor in the creations of images. 
 
 
9. References 
[1] R. P. Gaudio, “Sounding gay: Pitch properties in the speech of gay 
and straight men,” American Speech, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 30–57, 1994.  
[2] S. E. Linville, “Acoustic correlates of perceived versus actual sexual 
orientation in men’s speech,” Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, vol. 50, 
no. 1, pp. 35–48, 1998. 
[3] H. Baeck, P. Corthals, and J. Van Borsel, “Pitch characteristics of 
homosexual males,” Journal of Voice, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. e211–e214, 
2011. 
[4] E. Levon, “Sexuality in context: Variation and the sociolinguistic 
perception of identity,” Language in Society, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 533–
554, 2007. 
[5] E. Levon, “Categories, stereotypes, and the linguistic perception of 
sexuality,” Language in Society, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 539–566, 2014. 
[6] K. Drager, K. Hardeman -Guthrie, R. Schutz, and I. Chik, 
“Perceptions of style: A focus on fundamental frequency and perceived 
social characteristics,” in Social Meaning and Linguistic Variation: 
Theorizing the Third Wave, 2021, pp. 176–198. 
[7] R. Smyth, G. Jacobs, and H. Rogers, “Male voices and perceived 
sexual orientation: An experimental and theoretical approach,” 
Language in Society, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 329–350, 2003. 
[8] A. Suire, A. Tognetti, V. Durand, M. Raymond, and M. Barkat -
Defradas, “Speech acoustic features: A comparison of gay men, 
heterosexual men, and heterosexual women,” Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 2575–2583, 2020. 
[9] S. Kachel, A. P. Simpson, and M. C. Steffens, “‘Do I sound 
straight?’: Acoustic correlates of actual and perceived sexual 
orientation and masculinity/femininity in men’s speech,” Journal of 
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 15 60–
1578, 2018. 
[10]  R. J. Podesva, “Phonation type as a stylistic var