Iterate to Differentiate: Enhancing Discriminability and Reliability in
Zero-Shot TTS Evaluation
Shengfan Shen1,2, Di Wu2, Xingchen Song2, Dinghao Zhou2, Liumeng Xue1, Meng Meng2, Jian
Luan2, Shuai Wang1,∗∗
1 School of Intelligent Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
2 MiLM Plus, Xiaomi Inc., China
shenshengfan@hnu.edu.cn,shuaiwang@nju.edu.cn
Abstract
Reliable evaluation of modern zero-shot text-to-speech
(TTS) models remains challenging. Subjective tests are expen-
sive and difficult to reproduce, while objective metrics often
saturate, and therefore fail to distinguish state-of-the-art sys-
tems. To address this, we propose Iterate to Differentiate (I2D),
an evaluation framework that recursively synthesizes speech
using each model’s previously synthesized outputs as subse-
quent references. Stronger models tend to preserve intelligibil-
ity, speaker identity, and perceptual quality over more iterations,
whereas weaker systems degrade faster as reference quality and
text-audio consistency deteriorate. I2D exploits this differen-
tial degradation to amplify performance gaps and reveal robust-
ness. By aggregating objective metrics across iterations, I2D
improves metric discriminability and alignment with human
judgments, increasing system-level SRCC from 0.118 to 0.464
for UTMOSv2. Experiments on 11 models across Chinese, En-
glish, and emotion datasets demonstrate that I2D enables more
reliable automated evaluation for zero-shot TTS. Project page:
https://ssf-1103.github.io/I2D-Bench/.
Index Terms: speech synthesis, iterative evaluation, human-
aligned metrics
1. Introduction
In recent years, text-to-speech (TTS) systems have advanced
rapidly [1, 2, 3, 4], largely driven by progress in generative mod-
eling, including large language models (LLMs) and diffusion
models, together with the rapid expansion of training data and
computational resources. Modern TTS systems, particularly in
zero-shot voice cloning scenarios, are now capable of produc-
ing highly natural and expressive speech that approaches human
recordings in many practical settings.
Despite these advances in TTS modeling, evaluation
methodologies have not kept pace with improvements in syn-
thesis quality [5]. Traditional TTS evaluation can be broadly
categorized into objective and subjective approaches. Objective
evaluation typically relies on metrics such as word error rate
(WER) and speaker similarity (SIM). However, for state-of-the-
art (SOTA) TTS systems, these metrics are increasingly prone to
saturation: marginal improvements in objective scores often fail
to translate into perceptible gains in human perception [6]. This
issue is exacerbated by the inherent errors and biases of the eval-
uation models themselves, which limit their ability to reliably
distinguish among high-quality synthetic samples. Subjective
evaluation, by contrast, assesses audio quality through listening
tests, most commonly using the Mean Opinion Score (MOS),
where listeners rate speech quality on a five-point scale. While
**indicates the corresponding author.
MOS generally reflects human preferences reasonably well, its
subjectivity and inter-rater variability make the results difficult
to reproduce [7]. Furthermore, the substantial time and financial
costs associated with human evaluation severely restrict its scal-
ability. To alleviate these issues, recent studies have explored
neural network–based MOS prediction models as surrogates for
human ratings [8, 9, 10]. Nevertheless, these methods still ex-
hibit weak correlation with human judgments, particularly on
out-of-domain data or when distinguishing subtle quality dif-
ferences [11, 12].
To address these challenges, we proposeIterate to Differ-
entiate (I2D), a novel evaluation framework that moves beyond
static assessment. This strategy leverages the zero-shot capa-
bilities of modern TTS models by recursively using synthesized
outputs as reference audio and re-synthesizing them over mul-
tiple iterations, thereby exploiting error accumulation effects to
progressively amplify performance differences across models.
By analyzing the evolution of objective metrics across multiple
synthesis stages, I2D effectively characterizes a model’s robust-
ness under repeated self-conditioning. Our findings reveal that
the aggregated performance trajectory over iterations provides
a more reliable human-aligned proxy than single-turn objective
scores. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We conduct a systematic analysis of existing objective eval-
uation metrics and demonstrate that, under the conventional
evaluation protocol, commonly used metrics exhibit severe
score saturation. This saturation leads to unreliable model
rankings, particularly for predictive MOS metrics, limiting
their ability to discriminate among SOTA TTS systems.
• We introduce the I2D framework, which aggregates objective
scores across multiple synthesis iterations. This approach
amplifies performance differences between models, reduces
sensitivity to the inherent errors of evaluation models, and
improves correlation with human judgments while reflecting
model robustness.
• We conduct a comprehensive comparative analysis of 11 TTS
models across three datasets and provide a detailed examina-
tion of their content accuracy, speaker consistency, natural-
ness, and emotion-cloning behavior.
2. Related Work
2.1. Zero-shot TTS Models
Modern zero-shot TTS systems can be broadly catego-
rized into three architectural paradigms: autoregressive, non-
autoregressive, and hybrid models. Since evaluation behavior
may vary across architectural families, we include representa-
tive systems from each category in our experiments.
1327
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2414
Autoregressive (AR) models [4, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17] formu-
late TTS as a conditional sequence generation problem over
discrete audio tokens, employing decoder-only Transformers to
predict speech tokens step by step. This paradigm tends to yield
high naturalness and strong prosodic coherence, at the cost of
increased inference latency.
Non-autoregressive (NAR) architectures generate speech
representations in parallel, encompassing several sub-
paradigms. Diffusion-based models [18, 19] iteratively refine
noisy representations through a learned denoising process.
Flow-matching models [20] learn continuous normalizing flows
via straight-line trajectory regression, achieving competitive
quality with fewer sampling steps. Masked generative models
[21] progressively unmask discrete token sequences inspired
by masked language modeling.
Hybrid approaches [1, 2, 3, 22] adopt a two-stage pipeline
in which an LLM first predicts intermediate speech tokens au-
toregressively; these tokens are subsequently decoded into high-
fidelity acoustic features using a diffusion or flow-matching
model. This design effectively combines the complementary
strengths of both paradigms.
2.2. TTS Evaluation Benchmarks and Metrics
Conventional TTS evaluation relies primarily on Word Error
Rate (WER) and Speaker Similarity (SIM), which measure
content intelligibility and speaker identity preservation, respec-
tively. Subjective evaluation is most commonly conducted us-
ing the Mean Opinion Score (MOS), where listeners rate over-
all perceptual speech quality on a five-point scale [7]. Variants
such as CMOS employ pairwise comparisons to capture relative
preferences, while SMOS focuses on style and timbre similarity
to a target speaker. Although MOS broadly reflects human per-
ceptual preferences, its inherent inter-rater variability and high
sensitivity to diverse conditions make scores difficult to repro-
duce and compare across studies.
To reduce reliance on costly listening tests, prior work has
proposed neural predictors that estimate perceptual quality di-
rectly from audio signals. DNSMOS [9] introduced a non-
intrusive quality predictor originally designed for speech en-
hancement. The V oiceMOS Challenge 2022 [23] subsequently
advanced this direction and led to widely adopted models such
as UTMOS [10]. The V oiceMOS Challenge 2024 [11] further
introduced a “zoomed-in” evaluation subset comprising high-
quality systems and revealed that most existing MOS predictors
struggle to reliably distinguish and rank strong models. Sim-
ilarly, UrgentMOS [12] identified the same phenomenon, fur-
ther underscoring the limitations of neural MOS predictors in
the strong-model regime.
Inspired by LLM-as-Judge approaches [24], recent stud-
ies have explored Large Speech Language Models (LSLMs)
as surrogates for human evaluation. AudioJudge [25] exam-
ines the feasibility of unified LSLM-based evaluation and an-
alyzes the effects of prompt engineering. SpeechJudge [26]
constructs a large-scale human preference dataset and trains a
dedicated judge via a two-stage procedure on Qwen2.5-Omni-
7B [27]. SpeechLLM-as-Judges [28] further explores struc-
tured and explainable quality assessment using LSLMs. While
promising, these methods introduce substantial computational
overhead and may inherit the biases of the underlying LSLM.
Overall, existing evaluation methods face limitations in the
SOTA regime: objective metrics suffer from score saturation
and sensitivity to evaluation noise, subjective tests lack scalabil-
ity, neural MOS predictors struggle to distinguish subtle quality
differences reliably, and LSLM-based judges, although promis-
ing, remain at an exploratory stage.
3. Methodology
Our approach is motivated by a key observation:under the cur-
rent evaluation paradigm, objective metrics for SOTA TTS sys-
tems often exhibit score saturation, with inter-model differences
compressed into a narrow range. When these small differences
become comparable to the intrinsic noise of evaluation models,
metric fluctuations may fail to reflect true performance gaps, re-
sulting in unreliable rankings and weak human alignment. To
overcome this limitation, we adopt an error accumulation strat-
egy. We recursively reuse a model’s own synthesized outputs
as reference inputs, thereby exposing how quality degrades un-
der repeated self-conditioning. Stronger models degrade more
slowly, while weaker models deteriorate faster, leading to am-
plified performance differences across iterations. By exploiting
this differential degradation, our framework restores discrim-
inability to existing objective metrics.
Figure 1 illustrates the overall workflow of the I2D evalua-
tion framework. We construct the evaluation data based on three
open-source datasets: LibriTTS [29], Seed-TTS-Eval [1], and
CV3-Eval [2]. Using the proposed iterative evaluation protocol,
we conduct a systematic assessment of 11 SOTA TTS models.
During evaluation, we compute a set of objective metrics for
all synthesized speech samples and perform human subjective
evaluations on a selected subset to analyze the correlation be-
tween objective measures and human judgments. This section
describes the design of the iterative synthesis protocol, the con-
struction of the evaluation datasets, and the metrics used for
both objective and subjective evaluation.
3.1. Iterative Synthesis Protocol
Given a TTS modelM, we define an iterative synthesis pro-
tocol over an evaluation set, where each sample is a triplet
(ref wavi,ref texti,text i). Here,ref wavi denotes
the reference speech,ref texti its transcription, andtext i
the target text to be synthesized.
At each iteration, the speech generated byMis reused as
the reference audio for the next round, while the target text re-
mains unchanged. Repeating this process yields synthesized
samples at increasing iteration depths. Notably, if the model in-
troduces intelligibility errors at iterationj(e.g., hallucinations
or omissions), then the synthesized speech becomes inconsis-
tent with the target text used in iterationj+ 1. This text-audio
mismatch serves as an implicit error amplification mechanism:
less robust models accumulate misalignment more rapidly, lead-
ing to faster quality degradation and more pronounced perfor-
mance differences. Formally, the iterative synthesis process is
defined as follows:
Algorithm 1Iterative Speech Generation
Input:M, ref wavi, ref texti, texti,max iteration
Output:{iter wavj
i|j= 1,...,max iteration}
j←1
whilej≤max iterationdo
iter wavj
i←M(ref wavi,ref texti,text i)
ref wavi←iter wavj
i
ref texti←text i
j←j+ 1
end while
1328
Target text
LibriTTS
Seed-TTS-Eval
CV3-Eval
Reference
wav
Reference
text
Target wav
Evaluation
Update
Open-Source
Datasets
Qwen3-TTS
CosyVoice3
IndexTTS2
F5-TTS
......
TTS Model
WER SIM
DNSMOS UTMOS
Objective Metrics
Content Accuracy
Speaker Consistency
Naturalness
Subjective Metrics
Correlation
Update
EMO_F1
Figure 1:The overall workflow of our evaluation. The dashed arrows indicate that, after the first synthesis, the reference waveform
and reference text are updated using the target waveform and target text. The objective metricEMO F1is applied only to the Emotion
dataset.
The iteration continues until the predefined maximum num-
ber of iterationsmax iterationis reached. All synthesized
speech samples generated at each iteration are retained and used
for subsequent objective metric computation and analysis.
3.2. Dataset Construction
We construct three evaluation subsets: a Chinese dataset, an
English dataset, and an emotion dataset. The details of each
subset are summarized as follows:
•Chinese dataset: This subset originates from thetest-zhsplit
of Seed-TTS-Eval, comprising speech samples derived from
DiDiSpeech [30]. It contains 2,020 utterances from 1,010
speakers, with each speaker contributing two audios. The
duration of each sample ranges from 4 to 12 seconds.
•English dataset: This subset is constructed from thetest-
cleansplit of LibriTTS. We filter the original samples by du-
ration, retaining only those between 3 and 15 seconds. The
final dataset consists of 2,915 utterances from 38 speakers.
•Emotion dataset: This subset is sourced from theEmo-
tion Cloningsplit of CV3-Eval, with speech samples from
EmoBox [31] and SeCap [32]. It includes both Chinese and
English speech and covers three emotion categories: happy,
sad, and angry. For each language, it includes 50 samples per
emotion, resulting in a total of 300 samples.
In addition, we randomly select 100 samples from the Chi-
nese dataset to form a human-evaluation subset, ensuring that
each selected sample corresponds to a unique speaker.
3.3. Evaluation Metrics
We perform objective evaluations on all datasets and further
conduct subjective evaluations on the human-evaluation subset.
For objective evaluation, we adopt four commonly used met-
rics for the Chinese and English datasets: word/character er-
ror rate (WER/CER), speaker similarity (SIM), DNSMOS [9],
and UTMOSv2 [33]. For the emotion dataset, we report only
the emotion classification F1-score. For subjective evaluation,
we adopt the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) protocol. To en-
able fine-grained analysis and correlation with objective met-
rics, we define three evaluation dimensions:Content Accuracy,
Speaker Consistency, andOverall Naturalness. For each di-
mension, detailed scoring criteria and annotation guidelines are
provided. We recruit annotators from a professional data anno-
tation company and conduct standardized training prior to an-
notation to ensure a consistent understanding of the evaluation
criteria. During annotation, each test sample is presented to-
gether with the synthesized audio, the corresponding reference
audio, and the target text, enabling informed judgments. To mit-
igate individual subjectivity, each sample is independently rated
by five or six annotators.
Table 1:Objective metrics and subjective evaluation dimen-
sions
Type Metrics / Dimensions
Objective
WER/CER
SIM
DNSMOS
UTMOSv2
Emotion F1
Subjective
Content Accuracy
Speaker Consistency
Overall Naturalness
To comprehensively account for evaluation results across
multiple synthesis iterations, rather than relying on a single it-
eration, we design several aggregation methods to summarize
metric trajectories over iterations. Let score i denote the metric
value at thei-th iteration, and letN=max iteration denote the
maximum number of iterations.
•Mean Score
The arithmetic mean of metric values across all iterations:
Mean= 1
N
NX
i=1
scorei (1)
•Linearly Weighted Average (LW A)
1329
Later iterations are assigned linearly increasing weights:
LW A=
PN
i=1i·score i
PN
i=1i
(2)
•Exponentially Weighted Average (EW A)
As written below, iteration weights decay withdepth, giving
earlier iterations larger weights:
EW A=
PN
i=1αi·score i
PN
i=1αi
, α= 0.9(3)
•Area Under Curve (AUC)
The iteration-wise metric values are treated as a discrete
curve, and the area is computed using the trapezoidal rule:
AUC=
N−1X
i=1
scorei +score i+1
2 (4)
For correlation analysis, metrics with lower-is-better se-
mantics, such as WER/CER, are converted to higher-is-better
form when necessary (e.g., using1−CER) to ensure consis-
tent interpretation across metrics.
4. Experiments
4.1. Evaluated Models
We evaluate 11 open-source TTS models with strong reported
performance. Specifically, we use Qwen3-TTS-12Hz-1.7B-
Base for Qwen3-TTS and CosyV oice-300M for CosyV oice.
These models cover three major architectural paradigms: au-
toregressive (AR), non-autoregressive (NAR), and hybrid archi-
tectures. Table 2 summarizes the evaluated systems and their
corresponding categories.
Table 2:Evaluated TTS Models and Architectures
Architecture Model
AR
FireRedTTS2 [22]
Qwen3-TTS [4]
V oxCPM1.5 [34]
NAR F5-TTS [20]
MaskGCT [21]
Hybrid
CosyV oice [35]
CosyV oice2 [36]
CosyV oice3 [2]
CosyV oice3-RL [2]
GLM-TTS [37]
IndexTTS2 [3]
4.2. Prompt Configuration
For the Chinese and emotion datasets, predefined prompt au-
dio lists are provided, and we strictly follow the official evalua-
tion settings. For the English dataset, prior evaluations based
on LibriTTStest-cleanadopt inconsistent configurations, in-
cluding differences in sample selection and prompt construc-
tion, with many implementation details unavailable. To ensure
reproducibility and eliminate ambiguity in prompt design, we
directly use the ground-truth audio corresponding to the target
text as the reference audio for the first synthesis iteration. This
design is not intended to boost first-turn performance, but rather
to standardize the prompt configuration.
4.3. Evaluation Implementation
We set max iteration to 10 and compute objective metrics for
the synthesized speech at each iteration. For the English dataset,
all objective metrics are computed using the VERSA toolkit
[38]. Specifically, WER is calculated with Whisper-large-v3
[39], and SIM is computed using ESPNet [40]. For the Chinese
dataset, CER and SIM follow the official evaluation protocol of
Seed-TTS-Eval, where Paraformer-zh [41] is used for speech
recognition and a fine-tuned WavLM model [42] is used for
SIM evaluation. DNSMOS and UTMOSv2 are also obtained
via the VERSA toolkit. For the emotion dataset, we follow the
official CV3-Eval protocol and utilize the emo2vec-large-plus
model [43] to report the F1-score for each emotion category,
along with the weighted average.
For human evaluation, we include all first-iteration and
tenth-iteration synthesized samples from the human-evaluation
subset, along with their corresponding real recordings. This re-
sults in 2,290 evaluation samples in total. Each sample is inde-
pendently rated by 5 to 6 annotators, yielding 11,752 annotation
records. To prevent loudness discrepancies from biasing per-
ceptual judgments, we apply energy normalization to all audio
samples prior to annotation. To ensure data quality, we perform
outlier filtering using three independent criteria: inter-annotator
consistency, annotation duration, and discrepancy between sub-
jective and objective scores. An annotation was excluded only if
it violated at least two of the three criteria. This process resulted
in the exclusion of approximately 1.2% of the total annotations.
5. Results & Analysis
5.1. Low Discriminability and Weak Correlation under
Score Saturation
A fundamental expectation in objective TTS evaluation is that
metric scores should be consistent with human judgments and
preserve human-aligned system rankings. When analyzing the
correlation between conventional evaluation results and human
judgments, however, we observe an unexpected and concerning
phenomenon: weak correlation between objective metrics and
subjective scores across systems.
Fig. 2 presents the Spearman Rank Correlation Coefficients
(SRCC) between objective and subjective metrics. Specifically,
the utterance-level correlation is calculated based on scores of
all individual samples, while the system-level correlation is de-
rived from the overall model rankings. At the first iteration, SIM
and CER exhibit weak positive correlations with Speaker Con-
sistency and Content Accuracy at the utterance level. At the sys-
tem level, however, both metrics maintain relatively strong posi-
tive correlations, indicating that they retain some coarse-grained
ranking ability across models. In contrast, predictive MOS met-
rics perform even worse. At both the utterance and system lev-
els, UTMOSv2 and DNSMOS exhibit only very weak corre-
lations with overall naturalness. This implies that, under the
prevailing evaluation protocol, these metrics are inadequate for
producing reliable system rankings for high-performance TTS
models.
To understand the reason behind this phenomenon, we fur-
ther analyze the distribution of metric scores across systems.
As shown in Fig. 3, at the first iteration, all evaluated models
achieve highly similar scores across the four objective metrics,
and some models reach or even surpass the level of ground truth.
The standard deviation of SIM (percentage) is 3.83, which de-
creases to 1.51 after excluding CosyV oice, whose score is sub-
stantially lower than those of others. Likewise, the standard
1330
1-CER SIM
UTMOSv2 DNSMOS
Content Acc.
Spk. Consistency
Naturalness
0.18 0.04 0.08 0.11
0.02 0.32 0.02 -0.02
0.10 0.13 0.26 0.08
Utterance-Level (Iter 1)
1-CER SIM
UTMOSv2 DNSMOS
Content Acc.
Spk. Consistency
Naturalness
0.51 0.33 0.01 -0.02
0.35 0.68 -0.15 -0.03
0.41 0.25 0.12 0.09
System-Level (Iter 1)
1-CER SIM
UTMOSv2 DNSMOS
Content Acc.
Spk. Consistency
Naturalness
0.70 0.60 0.55 0.61
0.61 0.63 0.57 0.63
0.66 0.65 0.66 0.73
Utterance-Level (Iter 10)
1-CER SIM
UTMOSv2 DNSMOS
Content Acc.
Spk. Consistency
Naturalness
0.86 0.88 0.79 0.90
0.89 0.95 0.86 0.85
0.79 0.84 0.80 0.95
System-Level (Iter 10)
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Spearman Correlation
Figure 2:SRCCbetween objective metrics and subjective dimensions atutterance and system levels(1st and 10th iterations).
Utterance-level SRCC is calculated from all individual sample scores, while system-level is derived from model rankings. Specifi-
cally, we compare SIM with Spk. Consistency, 1-CER with Content Acc., and UTMOSv2/DNSMOS with Naturalness.
Table 3:System-level SRCC between iteration-aggregated ob-
jective metrics and human ratings of first-iteration speech. Iter1
denotes the conventional first-iteration baseline.
Score
Method SIM1−CERUTMOSv2 DNSMOS
Iter1 0.6818 0.5103 0.1182 0.0909
Mean 0.6818 0.48290.4636 0.2545
LW A 0.68180.51940.4364 0.2091
EW A0.72730.4282 0.4273 0.1364
AUC 0.6818 0.4282 0.45450.2545
deviations of CER (percentage), UTMOSv2, and DNSMOS
are only 0.64, 0.12, and 0.07, respectively. These results re-
veal a pronounced score saturation: performance differences
among strong models on these metrics are compressed into an
extremely narrow numerical range (within approximately 2%
for all metrics). Under such a limited range, the intrinsic bias of
evaluation models becomes comparable to, or even larger than,
the true performance gap across systems. As a consequence,
small fluctuations in metric evaluation can alter system rank-
ings, leading to unreliable results and weak correlation with hu-