Towards participatory speech dataset curation:
A queer case study and conceptual framework
Brooklyn Sheppard1,2, Anaelia Ovalle2, Adina Williams2, Levent Sagun2
1 University of Calgary
2 Meta FAIR
brooklyn.sheppard1@ucalgary.ca
Abstract
In this paper, we motivate the need for a participatory
speech dataset creation framework through a case study of the
LGBTQIA+, orqueer, community - a community with docu-
mented concerns about AI and reported harms, including at-
tempts to develop ‘gaydar’ technologies that purportedly iden-
tify individuals as queer. We review common speech data col-
lection practices, why these methods may be unsuitable for en-
gaging with queer speakers, and discuss previous efforts in par-
ticipatory AI with queer community engagement, as well as
participatory endeavours specific to speech data collection for
other marginalized communities. From this review, we develop
a conceptual framework for participatory speech data curation
by, for, and with marginalized communities drawing on insights
from co-design and knowledge sharing. We propose a frame-
work comprising overlapping and two-way processes of defin-
ing a community, project formulation, modes of participation,
and personal autonomy.
Index Terms: data, participatory, co-design, responsible, AI
1. Introduction
It is notoriously difficult to collect speech data that is both high-
quality and diverse. In addition to simply recording the speech
itself, a significant amount of labour from those within the lan-
guage community is required to accurately annotate the data
[1], and further care should be taken when dealing with po-
tentially sensitive annotations related to speaker identity. For
example, while gender annotations are quite common across
speech datasets, for those who do not identify within the gender
binary, this information may identify them as being a member
of the LGBTQIA+, orqueer, community.
Crowdsourcing is commonly used as an efficient method of
speech data collection and annotation. Crowdsourcing efforts in
speech data collection have resulted in datasets for specific lan-
guages [2], specific dialects of a given language [3], and specific
demographic groups within a language community [4]. While
large-scale crowdsourcing is efficient, a gap exists when these
efforts lack meaningful, long-term collaboration. This has led
to concerns about so-called ‘participation washing,’ where en-
gagement is temporary rather than a sustained commitment [5].
In contrast, participatory efforts in AI reflect the process of en-
gaging with diverse stakeholders, bringing users, affected com-
munities, researchers, and engineers together to collaboratively
design AI models by, for, and with the affected community.
Recent advances in participatory AI argue against the ap-
proach of simply scaling up data collection efforts to be more
inclusive of diverse perspectives. For example, there are many
diverse speech datasets that aim to represent a variety of speaker
backgrounds, including the Fairspeech and Casual Conversa-
tions datasets, however, despite including speaker gender labels,
the majority of these datasets do not include any speakers out-
side the gender binary, and those that do only contain a small
number of speakers from this group [6, 7]. In contrast, efforts
that focus on a specific community, such as the Mid-Atlantic
Gender Expansive Speech (MAGES) corpus for gender-diverse
representation in speech, instead provide data for specific use-
cases such as diversifying synthetic voices or further under-
standing the role of one’s speech in portraying their queer iden-
tity [8, 9].
With participatory approaches gaining traction in responsi-
ble and ethical AI, we propose that it is beneficial to consider
participation at all stages, including and as early as dataset cre-
ation, and that such methods are particularly well-suited for di-
versifying speech technology datasets. The main contributions
of the present work are 1) to motivate the need for a partici-
patory framework for speech dataset curation through the lens
of queer speakers, and 2) to propose a conceptual framework
for speech dataset curation by, for, and with marginalized com-
munities; thus providing speech researchers with an accessible
framework to engage in participatory approaches to speech data
curation.
2. Challenges in speech data diversity: The
case of queer speakers
We begin by describing the queer community, why this commu-
nity is an important case study for inclusive speech technology,
and the unique challenges associated with direct engagement
between the queer and speech technology communities.
2.1. The queer community & their voice(s)
In this work, we describe the queer community as anyone
who self-identifies as ‘possessing non-normative sexual iden-
tity, gender identity, and/or sexual characteristics‘ [10]. The
queer community serves as an intriguing case study for speech
data collection for a variety of reasons. First, despite speaker
gender being a common annotation in most speech datasets,
gender diverse speakers have the added complexity that volun-
teering their gender identity essentially “outs” them as being a
part of this marginalized community in a way that is distinct
from cisgender binary identifying individuals. Thus, while gen-
der annotations are not commonly assumed to be sensitive anno-
tations compared to demographic factors such as sexual orien-
tation or disability status, they become inherently tied to sensi-
tive category status when including diverse gender perspectives.
Second, the queer community represents a group of speakers
whose speech characteristics may change considerably through
time and context, either as a result of voice coaching or hormone
3690
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2908
therapy, or when communicating with speakers within versus
outside this community [11, 12].
The inclusion of queer speech in datasets for speech tech-
nology research would be beneficial in various domains such
as speech recognition, speech categorization, and speech syn-
thesis. In terms of speech synthesis, many current modelling
efforts aim to provide a diverse set of voices either as a part of
voice cloning efforts for those who may soon or have already
lost their ability to speak [8, 13, 14], or to diversify the voice
options for end-users of a system. Indeed, recent work on the
perception of synthetic voices shows that when provided with
the option to customize voices in AI-voice assistants, users are
more likely to have a positive experience and increased trust in
their AI assistant, and this increase in trust can go so far as to
mitigate misinformation they had previously been exposed to.
[14].
In the realm of speech recognition or speech categoriza-
tion (i.e., speaker verification, emotion classification, etc.), pre-
vious research has found that these models are biased along
several demographic axes including gender, age, race and dis-
ability status [15]. In terms of gender biases, previous inves-
tigations found that ASR models perform significantly worse
on female voices when they are underrepresented in the train-
ing data [16], but due to lack of data, most of these inves-
tigations are limited to biases along the gender binary [17].
One previous study did attempt to investigate potential per-
formance disparities across three speaker gender categories -
“male”, “female”, and “other” from the Common V oice 16.0
dataset [18]. These researchers found that all speech models
tested performed worse for speakers of a particular gender, how-
ever, models differed in whether they favoured the “male” for
“female” identifying speakers. Intriguingly, however, the au-
thors note that the “other” gender category was never favoured
across any of the models tested. While these results do indeed
suggest performance biases against speakers that do not iden-
tify within the gender binary, with a sample size of only 8 to 86
speakers depending on the language, the authors note that this
investigation is merely preliminary, and that more data is needed
to make generalizable conclusions. With such limited data, it is
then difficult to advance research in speech technology that is
appropriate and useful to queer users, as well as evaluate the
performance of existing models on this group of speakers. In
the following section, we discuss unique challenges of queer
speech data collection through previous findings of AI harms to
this community and common data collection practices.
2.2. The queer community and AI
The queer community is a salient case study for ethical speech
data collection given the long history of AI and technological
harms associated with this community. [19] surveys the impacts
of AI hype on the queer community noting several examples of
how these tools have been used to harm the queer community,
from claims of an AI “gaydar” to using geolocation data to tar-
get trans healthcare facilities for harm [19]. Prior work reports
disproportionate flagging of queer dialects as toxic when using
AI models for content-moderation [20, 21]. Additionally, qual-
itative interviews with trans and non-binary users of voice AI
assistants, such as Siri and/or Alexa, found that these users con-
veyed a deep lack of trust in AI developers, specifically men-
tioning concerns of their privacy, describing discomfort at the
thought of being visible to AI developers, and overall doubts
of the ethics of AI practices [22]. In addition to AI harms on
the queer community, the data collection practices common in
speech technology are also not typically designed to take queer
perspectives into account. For example, gender annotation prac-
tices have historically been annotated based on perceived gen-
der and limited to binary gender labels, which risks misgender-
ing and further erasure of the queer community, although self-
reported gender identity is becoming increasingly more com-
mon in speech datasets [3, 7]. Thus, the queer community
serves as a challenging case study for participatory design in
speech data collection given the longstanding lack of trust be-
tween this community and AI developers, and the lack of queer
representation in current crowdsourced speech datasets.
3. Previous efforts in participatory AI
Some recent efforts in participatory AI have focused on en-
gaging directly with the queer community, particularly in the
field of AI-assisted mental health resources [23, 24]. For ex-
ample, the Participatory Queer AI Research in Mental Health
(PARQAIR-MH) proposes to use a method which involves sev-
eral rounds of anonymous surveys consulting queer commu-
nity members in an effort to iteratively come to a consensus
on desiderata for the design of mental health AI tools [24].
This method allows for the development of a toolkit for AI re-
searchers and health policy institutions for taking queer prefer-
ences into account during the design and development of men-
tal health AI tools. The process is participatory in that the queer
community is explicitly sought after for guidance on how best
to create technologies that serve this community, however, the
extent to which the queer experts can influence model design or
data collection down the road is limited.
When working with speech data, however, the imperative
for community participation becomes even more pronounced.
Members of a given community not only provide the speech
recordings and associated annotations, but also bear the risks
associated with voice data, including the potential for speaker
identification. These risks are heightened in contexts where
voice data could inadvertently disclose an individual’s member-
ship in a marginalized community, thereby increasing the like-
lihood of harm. Previous work on sensitive speech data in the
realm of speech related to neurological disorders proposes sev-
eral desiderata for ethically curating such speech datasets, in-
cluding informed consent, stringent security and privacy mea-
sures, and being transparent about which communities are rep-
resented and which are not [25].
A participatory approach to speech data curation is well-
suited to mitigate the inherent challenges of curating speech
datasets by centering the desires of the speech community at
all stages of the design process [26]. For example, in contrast
to the stringent security measures called for by [25], the Stam-
merTalk initiative [26] instead demonstrates a case where com-
munity members advocated for the public release of their co-
designed dataset for stuttered speech. This initiative, initially
created by speech AI researchers who identify as part of the
stuttering community, engaged with the online stuttering com-
munity, inviting anyone who is interested and self-identifies as
a stutterer to participate, with no restrictions on age, gender,
or other demographic factors. Additionally, a post-data col-
lection survey demonstrated that the process for both the re-
searchers and the speakers contributed to feelings of empower-
ment through helping provide these resources to their commu-
nity. The StammerTalk initiative is an excellent example of par-
ticipatory speech dataset creation, however, there is still a dis-
tinction between data collectors and data contributors in that the
core research team formulated the project design independently
3691
from the data contributors, or speakers, themselves. The ques-
tion then, is how to value the diverse perspectives of both the
researchers involved and the speakers themselves at all stages
in the data curation process.
Over the past several decades the field of linguistics has
also attempted to adopt more reciprocal and participatory meth-
ods for speech and language data collection from marginalized
communities [27, 28]. This is most often seen in field linguis-
tics, where typically white, European descendant scientists have
historically engaged in a one-way relationship in which the lin-
guist extracts data from a speaker in an effort to further the sci-
entific discipline rather than to benefit the language community
in any way. More recently, participatory efforts in field linguis-
tics have called for a more cyclical approach, where language
speakers and the linguists they work with engage in knowledge
transfer in both directions, often with the goal of revitalizing
the language through documentation and curriculum develop-
ment [29]. This method of engaging with the community in
a partnership of knowledge sharing allows the language com-
munity to be fully involved in the process from project goals
to the evaluation of outcomes. Drawing on the previous work
in participatory design and queer engagement in these various
fields, we propose a framework for participatory speech dataset
creation by, for, and with the queer community.
4. Conceptual framework for
community-led speech data curation
The previous participatory efforts in engaging with the queer
community and those focused on speech data collection of-
fer several key insights into possible avenues for participatory
speech dataset creation with the queer community. We sum-
marize the comparison of traditional speech dataset collection
efforts (e.g., crowdsourcing) to the proposed framework in Fig-
ure 1. First, central to all participatory work is the value of
the community‘s needs and lived experiences. While previous
efforts may differ in terms of whether they merely consult the
affected community or fully co-design the project with the af-
fected community, we highlight the utility of co-design when
feasible for speech data curation given the fact that the com-
munity members themselves must be involved from recording
the speech to annotating it, as well as the ones affected by this
data being available for speech technology research. Second,
in true co-design fashion, we envision the project formulation
being encapsulated within the community itself, drawing on ex-
periences from a diverse set of community members to inform
the project goals and scope. The formulation of project goals
and design then lead us to different possible modes of participa-
tion, such as contributing one‘s voice, providing annotations of
speech, or other labour related to project organization and doc-
umentation. Of course, the specific modes of participation may
be different for each individual contributor, finally leading us
to the level of personal autonomy over one‘s own contributions
and choices in terms of how their data may be used, how they
would like their efforts to be acknowledged, and their personal
level of involvement in the project. Lastly, the insights from lin-
guistic field methods and co-design in terms of knowledge shar-
ing suggest a two-way approach to honour the contributions of
all parties involved.
We present this framework as a form of normative infras-
tructure for speech dataset governance, rather than prescriptive
set of requirements. We conceptualize this process through four
phases of engagement that may relate to each other in a cyclical
(a)Top-Down Approach
 (b)Co-Design Approach
Figure 1:Schematics of speech dataset creation frameworks.
Left Panel: A one-directional flow from researcher to output;
Right Panel: Nested circles with bidirectional arrows indicating
iteration, collaboration, and co-design.
fashion. These phases are 1) community, 2) project formulation,
3) modes of participation, and 4) personal autonomy. Along
these four phases, we provide questions to guide community
contributors through the speech data curation process.
4.1. Community
While many participatory approaches in AI begin with project
conception or formulation, we instead focus first on the com-
munity the project is aimed to serve. That is, in true co-design
fashion, the specifics of the project‘s goals would benefit from
input from the community members themselves. Thus, we be-
gin our proposed engagement framework by first defining as-
pects related to the community members involved.
Who is this project going to serve?In this case study, we
take the termqueerto mean anyone who self-identifies as be-
ing a part of this community, including but not limited to queer
researchers in speech technology and linguistics.
Who might be left out and why?Beginning with a broad
approach to queer speech, we then consider who might be left
out from this process. This includes varying intersections of
identities within the queer community itself, such as race, dis-
ability status, and language or dialect. For example, if we target
Queer in AI [30] – a community of queer AI researchers – this
network is primarily composed of individuals from countries of
the Global North and predominantly English speaking, thus po-
tentially skewing the representation to be those with historical
privilege. Different community engagement techniques, such as
broadening the outreach to more queer community-based initia-
tives around the world may help alleviate this issue of represen-
tation. That being said, it is unlikely that all perspectives will
be represented in a single project and thus members should be
explicit about who is not represented.
4.2. Project formulation
Once a general community is developed, the community mem-
bers can work together to define the project scope more con-
cretely in terms of genre(s) of speech and how the data will be
used, stored and maintained over time.
What type of speech are we hoping to collect?Given that
speech of varying discourse genres may differ considerably
(e.g., conversational speech versus read speech), it is important
to be explicit about what genre of speech will be collected and
consider the uses and risks of each. In the case of StammerTalk,
for example, the researchers collected a variety of genres in-
3692
cluding both conversational speech discussing lived experiences
with being a part of the stuttering community and a set of ASR
commands [26]. In the case of the queer community, a similar
approach may be helpful, but comes with its own challenges and
risks. A conversational interview regarding queer perspectives
and experiences could be ideal for assessing not only speech
models on their accuracies of this type of speech within this
community, but could also be helpful in identifying the relation-
ship between queer dialects and higher toxicity ratings found in
text models [20, 21], and perhaps even mitigated by the pres-
ence of speech [31]. That being said, this method risks the
recording of personal and intimate conversations that may ei-
ther dissuade participation or require a significant amount of
data to ultimately be removed.
Will the data be publicly available? What are the allow-
able uses of the data?Given the risks associated with publicly
available queer speech data, this is an important question for
the queer community. That is, publicly available speech data
may allow the queer community to be further targeted for harm,
while in contrast, publicizing the data may contribute to the em-
powerment of community members to be out and proud. It is
also deeply connected to the personal autonomy of each con-
tributing speaker in whether they will allow their own voice to
be a part of this dataset and how they will allow their personal
contributions of data to be accessed or updated, such as in the
case of fluctuating gender identities.
How will the data be stored? How will the data be main-
tained over time?Given the issue of data sensitivity in the case
of the queer community, it is important to be explicit about how
the data could be stored and maintained over time. For exam-
ple, how may community members revoke their data if they so
choose? Will all members have access to the data indefinitely?
The Databrary project is a particularly useful example of sen-
sitive data sharing in the case of child behavioural video data
which requires researchers hoping to access the data to have
undergone ethics training and be affiliated with an institution
that is governed by an ethics review board [32].
4.3. Modes of participation
Having defined the project scope, one can now turn to how par-
ticipation might occur. In the realm of speech data, this includes
how members may collaborate and how these contributions are
acknowledged.
How will members collaborate together?This pertains to
not only the practical aspect of communication platforms and
preferences among community members, but also about how
community members agree to share the space and navigate
power dynamics between the varying group members.
What are the different ways collaborators can participate?
In developing a speech dataset, there are many forms of par-
ticipation that one might choose to engage in. That is, some
members may choose to provide voice recordings or annota-
tions, while others may choose to take on an organizational role.
How will the contributions of collaborators be acknowl-
edged?A common method of acknowledging contributions in
speech data collection is of course where speakers are paid for
their work [26, 7]. Additionally, in field linguistics and in some
more recent speech datasets for AI, authorship on any associ-
ated papers of the project may additionally be a desirable out-
come for some [33]. How one would like their contributions to
be acknowledged may be a highly individual preference, thus
bringing us to the phase of personal autonomy.
4.4. Personal autonomy
Finally, we come to the issue of personal autonomy; that is, each
individual‘s right to engage in the process that is most empow-
ering to them. This of course interacts with all other levels of
the framework as not only is a community and its needs defined
through a mosaic of the needs of individuals within that com-
munity, but the individual actions of each member may have
downstream effects on the community as a whole.
At which points of the process do we expect group consen-
sus versus individual choices?The delicate balance between
personal autonomy and community responsibili