Queer inclusion in speech datasets:
An audit and taxonomy of practical tensions
Brooklyn Sheppard1,2, Anaelia Ovalle2, Adina Williams2, Levent Sagun2
1 University of Calgary
2 Meta FAIR
brooklyn.sheppard1@ucalgary.ca
Abstract
In this paper, we examine speech datasets for their inclusion of
LGBTQIA+, orqueer, voices and provide a taxonomy of ten-
sions to better understand why there is a lack of such voices
in current speech technology datasets. Through an audit of six
diverse speech datasets, we find that measurable queer represen-
tation is low (0–1.4% of speakers) - insufficient for robust dis-
parity measurement. We take this community as a case study to
consider what challenges and tensions are associated with col-
lecting speech data from marginalized communities. For com-
parison, we audit an additional two datasets from the speech sci-
ences that were created by, for, and with the queer community.
We note that many customs in speech dataset collection efforts
in AI and speech technology research may conflict with values
emphasized in participatory approaches with marginalized com-
munities, and provide a taxonomy describing these tensions.
Index Terms: data collection, audit, representation, inclusive,
responsible, AI
1. Introduction
Biases in speech and language models have often been partly at-
tributed to lack of representation in the training data, with those
underrepresented in the data being subject to disproportionately
higher error rates on a variety of downstream tasks, including
medical misdiagnoses, hiring decisions, and crime convictions
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. In the realm of speech models, creating di-
verse datasets is notoriously difficult given that, in contrast to
text datasets, they cannot be created via highly controlled tem-
plates or synthetic data [7, 5], and instead require recruiting and
recording speakers of a variety of different language commu-
nities. For annotations of sensitive attributes related to speaker
identity, such as gender, disability status, or sexual orientation,
the challenges in ethical data collection are amplified in speech
given that participation depends on feeling safe to share these
sensitive attributes related to their identity and that speech data
is generally harder to anonymize than text, potentially expos-
ing participants to unintended harms such as re-identification or
voice misappropriation [8, 9].
Sociolinguistic research has identified that one’s voice is
perceived as carrying an abundance of identity related charac-
teristics, including age, race, gender, and sexuality [10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16]. Given the deeply rooted connection between
voice and identity, we contend that the lack of voices from
a given community in diverse speech datasets may contribute
to biases towards these identities in speech technologies. Re-
searchers in linguistics and speech sciences have studied not
only the phonetic, prosodic, and lexical variations of queer
speech [17, 18, 19, 20, 21], but also the use of one’s voices in
building and portraying a distinct identity related to one’s gen-
der identity or sexual orientation [22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. With one’s
voice being inherently linked to sensitive identity characteris-
tics, collecting speech data representative of the queer commu-
nity is particularly difficult given the harms that could arise from
having labeled queer speech widely available, such as creating
‘gaydar’ technologies [27]; however, the lack of queer voices in
speech technology datasets risks speech models systematically
underperforming for speakers of this group.
Indeed, there have been several investigations into the so-
cial biases of speech models, such as wav2vec2.0, HuBERT,
and Mockingjay [28, 29, 30]. These investigations have demon-
strated biases including associating the speech of certain groups
with more positive valence over others, such as abled over dis-
abled speakers and European Americans over African Ameri-
cans speakers [31]. Crucially, they found that these associa-
tions persist beyond lexical content and correlate with speaker
identity attributes. Additionally, these biases within the embed-
ded representation of speech propagate to downstream tasks re-
vealing negative emotion associations with disabled, male, and
African American speech [31] and higher error rates on ASR
tasks [32, 33, 34, 35, 36]. Following the trend in text-based
bias research, recent work in speech model bias has attempted
to use similar measures and develop speech fairness datasets to
investigate implicit and explicit biases in speech-based models
along dimensions of gender [37, 38], ethnicity [39], first lan-
guage [40], and dialect [41, 42].
Several previous studies have noted that there is a signif-
icant lack of speech research relating to transgender and non-
binary folks [43, 44]. That is, many widely used speech datasets
used to train and evaluate models on downstream tasks such as
ASR, speaker verification, or speech synthesis provide only bi-
nary labels for speaker gender; this hinders the development
of more diverse and realistic synthetic voices and risks speech
models performing significantly worse for groups that are not
represented within the gender binary. Indeed, in an effort to
investigate gender biases in speech models beyond the binary
notion of gender, [45] used the Common V oice 16.0 corpus
to measure performance differences of various speech models
across speakers who identified as “male”, “female”, or “other”.
They found that across all models tested, while some models
favoured male speakers and others favoured female speakers, all
models revealed significant performance degradation for speak-
ers who identified their gender as “other”. Given the very lim-
ited sample size of speakers in this category (8 to 86 depend-
ing on the language), the authors note that this is merely a pre-
liminary investigation and that future work would benefit from
similar inquiries with a larger sample of speakers with various
gender identities. This, however, is not possible if speech data
from this community does not exist.
Thus, taking the LGBTQIA+, orqueer, community as a
3651
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2904
case study, the goal of this work is to audit diverse speech
datasets for their inclusion of queer voices, and through an anal-
ysis of dataset collection practices, we aim to identify why cur-
rent speech data collection efforts tend to omit or underrepre-
sent this community and provide a taxonomy of tensions be-
tween common AI data-collection practices and considerations
for engaging with the queer community. Note that the present
paper investigates the representation of queerness along the di-
mension of gender identity. This is an artifact of the fact that
gender is a commonly provided annotation in speech datasets,
while other queer identities are not. We believe, however, that
the tensions identified apply to the queer community as a whole.
2. Methodology
2.1. Dataset selection
We selected six English language speech technology datasets to
audit based on three criteria: (i) inclusion of diverse speaker
backgrounds – Edinburgh Accents (EdAcc) and English Di-
alects (Eng. Dia.) [42, 41]; (ii) previous use in assessing
fairness in speech models – L2-ARCTIC and Common V oice
22.0 (CV) [40, 46]; and (iii) datasets specifically designed for
speech fairness assessments – Fairspeech and Casual Conver-
sations V2 (CCV2) [47, 48]. That is, we audit open-source
speech technology datasets that are likely to be used for evalu-
ating performance disparities across speaker demographics. We
audit an additional two datasets that were designed specifically
for queer inclusion, namely, the Mid-Atlantic Gender Expan-
sive Speech (MAGES) Corpus and a Palette of Transmasculine
V oices (PTMV). The MAGES corpus consists of speech from
14 gender-expansive individuals, specifically those that don’t
identify within the gender binary [49]. The PTMV corpus con-
sists of sentences spoken by 20 different masculine identifying
participants [50]. This includes cis-men, trans-men, trans non-
binary folks, androgynous and more.
2.2. Axes of auditing
For each dataset, we ask the following questions regarding an-
notation practices, resulting distribution across gender labels,
institutional affiliation, mention of an ethics review, recruitment
methods, and data access:Gender identity annotation options:
Were gender labels self-provided? Were participants given pre-
defined categories to choose from or free to provide their own
label?Distribution of gender labels:Of the datasets that in-
clude gender annotations beyond the binary, what percentage
of the dataset consists of these speakers?Institutional affili-
ation:Is the primary institution of the first author a for-profit
corporation, not-for-profit organization or an academic institu-
tion?Ethics review disclosure:Does the associated study ex-
plicitly describe an ethics or institutional review process?Re-
cruitment methods:How were participants recruited? Was it
through crowdsourcing techniques or engagement with specific
underrepresented communities? If the latter, how did the re-
searchers engage with the community?Data access and usage:
Is the dataset open access? Does the license allow for the dataset
to be used for training and/or evaluating AI models?
3. Comparison of datasets
In the following sections, we outline the differences and simi-
larities in these datasets regarding their methods for annotating
gender categories, distribution across gender categories, their
institutional affiliations and mention of an ethics review, their
participant recruitment methods, and their data access and usage
requirements. A summary of our comparison across datasets is
provided in Table 1, with those created specifically with queer
speakers in the last two lines.
Gender annotation options:All datasets in our audit col-
lect gender annotations via self-provided labels. The CV dataset
allows for the mutually exclusive categories of self-provided
gender annotations of “male/masculine”, “female/feminine”,
“non-binary”, or “transgender”. The CCV2 dataset instead
provides categories for “cis-man”, “cis-woman”, “transgender
man”, “transgender woman”, and “non-binary”, but still re-
quires gender identities to fit into pre-defined, mutually exclu-
sive categories. In contrast, the MAGES and PTMV datasets al-
lowed participants to freely define their gender identities in their
own words. The only dataset for speech technology research
that allowed for free text write in options for gender identity
is that of the EdAcc dataset. Lastly, the Fairspeech, ARCTIC,
and English Dialects datasets all contain strictly binary gender
categories of male and female.
Distributions of gender labels:We next audit each dataset
for queer inclusivity with an analysis of the distributions of gen-
der categories. Given that the MAGES and PTMV datasets al-
lowed individuals to self-express with no category restrictions
and consist of predominantly queer speech, we do not provide
distinct counts of gender identities for these datasets. All of the
datasets do include gender annotations for each speaker, how-
ever, all but the CCV2 and EdAcc datasets include only binary
gender labels. Interestingly, while both the CV and Fairspeech
datasets had the option of identifying as outside the binary (e.g.,
“non-binary”, “transgender”) neither of these datasets contain
any speech from participants that identify with these labels. In
fact, as noted in the original Fairspeech paper, “since we didn’t
have a significant number of utterances from people who iden-
tified as non-binary, we chose to not include them, to not show
skewed results” ([35], p. 2). This suggests that while there
were indeed some non-binary participants, the speech from
these participants were excluded from the final dataset. On the
other hand, the CV dataset simply has zero contributors that
openly identify as either “transgender” or “non-binary”. Figures
1a and 1b demonstrate the counts of unique participants from
each dataset that does contain data from some queer speakers
(namely, CCV2 and EdAcc) by each possible gender category
within the dataset.
(a)Casual Conversation V2
 (b)Edinburgh Accents
Figure 1:Distributions of speaker gender across two datasets.
Institutional affiliations & ethics review disclosure:Of
the eight datasets considered, four come from academic insti-
tutions, three from large for-profit corporations, and one from
3652
Dataset # Speakers Institution EthicsRD Recruitment Annotations Open
access? Train Eval Queer
Rep. (%)
CCV2 ∼5,567 For-profit✗ Paid speakers 5 cat.✓ ✗ ✓1.44
CV 94,911 Non-profit✗ Crowdsourced 4 cat.✓ ✓ ✓0
EdAcc 122 Academic✓ Crowdsourced Self-provided✓ ✓ ✓0.82
Eng. Dia. 120 For-profit✗ Crowdsourced Binary✓ ✓ ✓0
Fairspeech 593 For-profit✗ Paid speakers Binary✓ ✗ ✓0
ARCTIC 24 Academic✗ V olunteers Binary✓ ✓ ✓0
MAGES 14 Academic✓ Word-of-mouth,
social media Self-provided✗ ✓ ✓100
PTMV 20 Academic✓ Social media Self-provided✓ ✗ ✗45
Table 1:Summary of speech datasets audited. Final two entries represent speech datasets created specifically for queer representation.
EthicsRD (ethics review disclosed) indicates whether the associated study explicitly describes an ethics or institutional review process.
a not-for-profit organization. Both queer-specific datasets were
created by researchers at academic institutions. Additionally,
only three datasets publicly disclosed an ethics or institutional
review process prior to data collection: MAGES, PTMV , and
EdAcc. We note, however, that lack of disclosure does not im-
ply absence of internal ethical review, particularly for datasets
produced within large industrial research organizations.
Participant recruitment methods:The majority of datasets
used crowdsourcing methods, either through microwork plat-
forms such as Fiverr or open calls to speakers, such as the
CV dataset’s online platform where anyone can contribute their
voice to the dataset. Both the EdAcc and English Dialects
datasets note that their initial data collection efforts stemmed
from personal connections with the dataset creators. For exam-
ple, the English Dialects dataset, created by Google, notes pro-
viding company-wide flyers asking for participation, including
recruiting friends and family of current Google employees. On
the other hand, the Fairspeech and CCV2, both created by Meta,
do not provide details on exactly how they selected and re-
cruited participants, but do indicate the speakers were paid par-
ticipants. In contrast, both of the queer-specific speech datasets
focused on community engagement via word-of-mouth and so-
cial media recruiting within the queer community.
Data access and usage:All datasets considered here, with
the exception of the MAGES corpus, are open access in that
they are freely available online. That being said, the Terms of
Use for several datasets restrict their use for certain purposes.
Specifically, both the Fairspeech and CCV2 datasets may only
be used to evaluate speech models, rather than train them. The
CV , EdAcc, English Dialects, and ARCTIC corpora, however,
are all available for both training and evaluating speech models,
with the hope that they will be used to improve speech mod-
els on a variety of different speakers and languages. While the
PTMV is open access and freely accessible, it states that its in-
tended use case is specifically for clinical purposes, such as for
speech pathologists to use as models of different expressions
of masculinity for voice coaching those of the transmasculine
community. The MAGES corpus, on the other hand, requires a
meeting with the lead researcher to discuss your intentions with
the data before it is released, in an effort to “honor the vulner-
ability and safety of this community” [49]. Both queer speech
datasets considered here were collected for the purpose of fur-
thering research in the speech sciences, however, the MAGES
corpus has also been used for modelling gender diverse voices
in text-to-speech applications [51].
4. Why is there a lack of queer voices in
diverse speech datasets?
From our audit of speech datasets and how they were collected,
we provide a taxonomy of four tensions between what is com-
monly assumed or valued in the AI community versus the stated
needs or preferences of the queer community: scaling versus in-
clusion, efficiency versus engagement, access versus autonomy,
and static categories versus fluid identities.
4.1. Scaling versus inclusion
The first tension we identify from our audit of diverse speech
datasets is that of scaling versus inclusion. Scaling data col-
lection efforts using crowdsourcing methods can be useful for
collecting a large amount of data; many of the datasets dis-
cussed here focused on crowdsourcing efforts for their partici-
pant recruitment in an effort to collect a large amount of diverse
speech. That is, the goal of these endeavours is to open data col-
lection to all people in an effort be as representative as possible.
This tension between scaling and inclusion is not inherent to
statistical laws of scaling, but rather an issue of scaling in prac-
tice. That is, if enough data is sourced, it may theoretically be
representative of all groups within a population, however, our
audit shows that this may not necessarily be the case for all
communities. A particularly interesting case of this tension is
provided by the CV dataset. That is, the CV dataset is truly
open and easy to contribute to - anyone with a microphone and
an internet connection can donate their voice. This has allowed
this effort to collect the largest amount of speech of all datasets
discussed here. Despite this openness, however, the CV corpus
has less queer representation than either the EdAcc or the CCV2
datasets, despite being 778 and 17 times their size in number of
speakers. This tension thus suggests that, while scaling data
collection efforts aim to be representative of all groups, our au-
dit shows that, in practice, this method may still underrepresent
small or stigmatized groups even with data from a large number
of speakers. This finding is not entirely surprising as openly
identifying as queer heightens the risk of discrimination and
harm from surveillance, suggesting that smaller, community-
focused data collection practices may alleviate this tension [52].
4.2. Efficiency versus engagement
A related tension we identify from this audit is that of effi-
ciency versus engagement. In addition to the goal of increasing
the amount of data being collected, crowdsourcing efforts also
have the benefit of being useful for collecting this data very ef-
ficiently. We argue that these methods may contradict the often
3653
slow process of engaging with affected community members to
build trust, understand their needs, and develop AI systems and
datasets collaboratively. For example, several datasets lack an
explicit disclosure of an ethics or institutional review process in
their papers; such processes can require researchers to reflect on
the purpose and possible harms of their project prior to data col-
lection. While this is often the standard in the humanities, this is
not the case in the AI community, despite many in recent years
calling for this to change [53]. This process typically requires
researchers to be explicit about their recruitment methods, ben-
efits and risks to participants, and how potential harms might
be mitigated. In the case of MAGES and PTMV datasets, par-
ticipants were recruited via direct engagement with the affected
community through social media and word-of-mouth initiatives
by researchers who identify as part of the queer community, fol-
lowing ethics review. These datasets are of course significantly
smaller than those provided by the AI community, reflecting the
need for patience throughout the engagement process.
4.3. Access versus autonomy
Open access and open science is highly valued not only in the
AI community, but the scientific community more generally,
with efforts in open science having contributed significant ad-
vances in AI research. That being said, this value can conflict
with the need for autonomy over one’s own speech data, includ-
ing how it is used and by whom. As noted in Section 1, speech
data is difficult to anonymize, potentially creating privacy risks
for participants involved, but one’s voice and speech may in
many cases reflects personal identity related to gender identity
or sexual orientation, and in turn can be of differing cultural sig-
nificance to different individuals. All datasets considered here,
with the exception of MAGES, are freely and openly available.
Having openly available data of queer speech available to
AI developers and the scientific community comes with poten-
tial risk to the community, such as contributing to the misappro-
priation of queer voices [9]. Indeed the MAGES corpus specif-
ically notes that its closed access is in an effort to honor the
vulnerability of this specific community. Interestingly, despite
the PTMV corpus being specifically designed for, with and by
members of the queer community, it resembles those lacking in
queer representation in that it is open access. The key difference
here is perhaps the way in which this data can be used. That is,
the PTMV dataset was designed for clinical purposes in assist-
ing gender diverse folks emulate a wide range of “masculine”
speech, while all other open-access datasets here are designed
for speech technology research. In contrast to the clinical ef-
forts of the PTMV dataset, the history of AI and technology in-
cludes instances where developments have adversely impacted
the queer community. Some of these harms include using geolo-
cation data to target and harm trans healthcare providers, pre-
dicting sexual orientation based on facial images, and the dis-
proportionate censorship of LGBTQIA+ content through auto-
mated content-moderation systems and keyword-based filtering
[27]. Additionally, qualitative interviews with trans and non-
binary users of voice AI technologies (e.g., Siri and Alexa) in-
dicate low levels of trust in developers’ ethics, business incen-
tives, and labor practices. As described by participants, these
concerns are often rooted in their perceptions of the broader
sociotechnical contexts of development, specifically the struc-
tural power and inequalities within which these systems are
produced [54]. Scholars such as [55] have proposed the con-
cept ofdata colonialismto describe asymmetries in data con-
trol, where academic or private institutions may inadvertently
dispossess workers from the very data they create [55]. This
method of extracting data from communities directly conflicts
with the concerns of queer folks related to the power and ide-
ologies embedded within AI systems.
4.4. Static categories versus fluid identities
All datasets audited included self-provided gender labels.
While this practice is more desirable to third-party annotations
on perceived gender [53], in many cases, the options for gender
labels are predefined and sparse. As demonstrated by PTMV
participant self-descriptions combining trans, non-binary, and
masculine identities, labels such as “trans” and “non-binary” are
not necessarily mutually exclusive. That is, many queer folks
may identify as any combination of male, female, transgender,
and non-binary. Thus, providing these pre-defined and mutually
exclusive categories may discourage participation from those
who aren’t comfortable describing their gender identity within
such strict confines. Additionally, the separation of the “trans-
gender” category from “male” and “female” within the CV
dataset could create an implied distinction between “transgen-
der men” and “men”, and “transgender women” and “women”.
The practice of using discrete categories, while common in
many AI and computer science applications for classifica