Should Robots Sound more like Machines than like Humans? User
Expectations Affect the Perception of Prosody in TTS V oices
Ha Eun Shim ID 1,2, Paige Tutt¨os´ı ID 3,4, Olivia Yung ID 1, Ivan Fong ID 1, Sara Ng ID 1, Angelica Lim ID
4, Yue Wang ID 1, H. Henny Yeung ID 1,5
1 Department of Linguistics, Simon Fraser University, Canada; 2 Department of Linguistics,
University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA; 3 Enchanted Tools, France; 4 School of Computing
Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada; 5 Integrated Neuroscience and Cognition Center (UMR
8002), CNRS & Universit´e Paris Cit´e, France
ha eun shim@sfu.ca; haeunshim@umass.edu
Abstract
Prosodic and indexical features of artificial voices, like nat-
uralness, tone, and emotion, are often treated as distinct from
intelligibility. Yet prosody can be critical: Consider, “She has to
pull Bart” (without commas/prosodic boundaries) versus “She
has to pull, Bart” (with commas/prosodic boundaries). Here,
we asked how humans disambiguated such sentences while lis-
tening to a robot avatar, as prosodic and indexical features in
the robot voice were manipulated. Prosodic pitch changes to
make the voice either affective or monotonic had little effect
on intelligibility. Surprisingly, indexical changes to increase
machine-like (and less human-like) voice quality, despite being
phonetically irrelevant to this prosodic contrast,increasedin-
telligibility, but only for sentences with commas. Results imply
that hearing machine-like voices changes listener expectations,
biasing or pushing listeners to hear prosodic boundaries (i.e.,
commas) that are otherwise hard to detect.
Index Terms: speech, prosody, human-computer interaction,
voice quality, pitch, text-to-speech (TTS), artificial voice
1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Current work on TTS voice design has largely focused on
prosodic (i.e., cues for speech melody) and indexical (i.e., cues
that signal speaker identity, gender, accent, etc.) features to im-
prove user experience in human-robot interaction, using mea-
sures such as satisfaction, anthropomorphism, perceived natu-
ralness, emotional expressiveness, and trust [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
However, what remainslessclear is how these design choices
shapespeech understanding, or intelligibility.
Intelligibility refers to a listener’s ability to correctly map a
spoken sentence to its intended meaning. Work on TTS voices
has historically treated intelligibility as separate from prosodic
and indexical factors, using comprehension (e.g., transcription
accuracy), as opposed to qualitative, questionnaire-based mea-
sures, such as the Mean Opinion Scale (MOS) or Godspeed
questionnaires [7, 8]. Indeed, while “extra-linguistic” prosodic
and indexical cues, such as voice quality, timbre, pitch varia-
tion, speech or disfluency rates, systematically influence how
listeners perceive and rate the quality of their conversations or
interlocutors, these changes are not often considered in relation
to intelligibility [9, 10, 11].
However, prosodic featurescaninfluence intelligibility un-
der certain circumstances. For example, prosody and intelligi-
bility become related concepts in syntactically ambiguous sen-
tences: While intelligible word by word, sentential meaning can
remain ambiguous without accurate prosody. Previous literature
shows that prosody can influence language comprehension, es-
pecially in resolving syntactic ambiguities [12, 13]. Relative
clause attachment is one such example. For instance, with the
sentence “Tap the frog with the flower,” two interpretations are
possible: “Tap // the frog with the flower” and “Tap the frog
// with the flower” [13]. The sentence is ambiguous because
the prepositional phrase (PP),with the flower, can attach either
to the noun phrase, the frog, or to the verb phrase, the tapping
event. With this ambiguity, the location of a prosodic boundary
helps listeners disambiguate the syntactic attachment of the PP.
In this study, we therefore examine how prosodic and in-
dexical cues of TTS voices can be critical for intelligibility,
especially for syntactic disambiguation marked by prosodic
boundaries. Although modern TTS systems are now very good
at mimicking human voices, they still struggle with subtle
prosodic cues that listeners use to resolve structure and mean-
ing [14, 15, 16]. Our research question addresses how differ-
ent voice properties affect prosodic disambiguation of sentence
meanings in TTS voices and which aspects of voice design sup-
port prosody perception in TTS speech. Specifically, we manip-
ulated two properties: Prosodic pitch changes to make voices
sound more monotonic and indexical voice quality changes to
make voices sound more machine-like. We used both qualita-
tive, questionnaire-based evaluations and objective measures of
intelligibility to identify properties of synthesized voices that
better support prosody-driven comprehension.
1.2. Current Study
We examined two dimensions of TTS voices that are not typi-
cally associated with intelligibility. First, we compared listen-
ers’ perception of prosodically ambiguous sentences produced
in an affective voice, which had greater pitch variation, and a
monotonic voice, which had reduced pitch variation. While
affective speech can involve other acoustic correlates beyond
pitch, such as intensity and duration, we focused on pitch vari-
ation. Note that the degree of pitch change or variation is
a phonetic cue that listeners use to mark prosodic boundaries
[17, 18, 19].
Second, we examined whether speaker identity, cued by
timbre changes in a voice to make it sound more machine-
like and less human-like, affected comprehension. Note that
changes to voice quality of the type we used here are not directly
related to the phonetic cues that humans use to mark prosodic
boundaries [20, 21].
3721
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3075
2. Method
2.1. Stimuli
We adopted two stimulus types from previous studies: “Direct
Address” (DA) and “List” sentences [14, 22]. In both types, the
location of prosodic boundaries, represented orthographically
by commas, signals different syntactic structures (see Table 1).
Each sentence occurred in a pair, contrasted based on punctu-
ation in two conditions:With CommaorWithout Comma.
Each member of the pair shared the same lexical sequence, dif-
fering in prosodic boundary locations.
We also created pairs of filler stimuli that follow the same
sequence of “DA” and “List” sentences. However, instead of
contrasting prosodic breaks, filler pairs differed in the tensity
of the vowel (e.g./hit/(heat) vs/hIt/(hit)). When perceiving
tense and lax vowels, local changes in speech rate can influ-
ence which vowel is heard [23, 24], and they are distinct from
global speech rate changes that influence evaluative questions
about an artificial voice (i.e., impression scores). Fillers were
pronounced using the prosodic structures of the With Comma
sentences.
Overall, there were six pairs of experimental stimuli for
each sentence type (“DA” or “List”) and four pairs of tense/lax
fillers for each sentence type. Thus, each participant heard 40
unique sentences in the study.
Table 1:Stimuli examples: List, DA, and Fillers
Type Stimuli*
DA: With Comma She has to pull, Bart.
DA: Without Comma She has to pull Bart.
List: With Comma The mom drove her kids,
Eugene, and Adele.
List: Without Comma The mom drove her kids
Eugene and Adele.
Filler (DA): Tense I felt the heat, man.
Filler (DA): Lax I felt the hit, man.
Filler (List): Tense The girl saw a beach,
a boat, and a dock.
Filler (List): Lax The girl saw a beach,
a boat, and a duck.
2.2. V oice Condition
We created four voice conditions: Human-like Affective,
Human-like Monotonic, Machine-like Affective, and Machine-
like Monotonic. Given that open-source TTS systems typi-
cally have difficulty making prosodic contrasts, we synthesized
recordings of all stimuli using a fine-tuned Matcha-TTS, a neu-
ral TTS system designed to be human-like in voice quality
[14, 25]. For fine-tuning, a female native English speaker read
and recorded sentences contrasting in target prosodic forms,
which were used as training input to fine-tune Matcha-TTS to
emphasize comma-related prosodic contrasts [14].
The output of the fine-tuned Matcha-TTS constituted the
Human-like Affective condition. The other three conditions
were derived from this output. To produce Monotonic voices
with reduced pitch variation, we used Praat V ocal Toolkit’s
commandChange pitch median and variationset to 40% (i.e.,
a forty percent reduction in pitch height and variation). To gen-
erate Machine-like voices with a robotic vocal quality, we used
the commandDelay0.02s with anAmplitudeof 0.5 Pa. To gen-
erate the Machine-like Monotonic voice, both manipulations
were applied to the Human-like Affective voice [26, 27].
2.3. Procedure
To ensure participants could complete the study in a timely fash-
ion (≈30 minutes), each individual only heard a single voice
condition. The first phase of the interaction task consisted of a
dialogue between a human participant and a robot avatar, dur-
ing which the participant listened to a robot speak a sentence
and confirmed comprehension through a picture-matching exer-
cise, ostensibly in order to “train” the avatar. The second phase
involved participants completing a questionnaire (see Table 2).
2.3.1. Robot Training Task
Our task asked participants to provide feedback to the robot
avatar to communicate more clearly. In each exchange, they
saw two images: atargetand anon-targetimage. Two prac-
tice trials were given to illustrate how these two images repre-
sented a potentially ambiguous meaning (as seen in Table 1).
In each trial, the avatar would attempt to say a sentence that
matched thetargetimage, but might have erred in pronuncia-
tion (for filler items) and prosody or intonation (for test items),
thereby changing the meaning of the sentence and matching the
non-targetimage. Written text of the stimulus was never shown
to participants. Participants were then asked to provide feed-
back on whether the avatar’s voice matched or mismatched the
target image. The feedback was recorded as a button selection.
If participants thought the avatar spoke correctly, they
would simply repeat the sentence. If not, alternatively, they
would correct it by repeating the sentence with the accurate
pronunciation or intonation. Participants were able to listen to
their recorded feedback at will; however, they had only one ad-
ditional attempt to re-record feedback, which was kept as the
final recording. An example trial is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1:Participants evaluated the robot avatar producing the
sentence, “She has to pull Bart, ” as either matching (correct)
or not matching the target image (incorrect).
2.3.2. Questionnaires
We first asked two questions about participants’ familiarity with
AI, and then evaluated their perception of the robot’s voice with
six questions. For the latter part, we followed a previous study
[4], whose short version of the MOS questionnaire, MOS-X2
3722
Table 2:Questionnaire
Questions: Rated from 0 (negative) to 10 (positive)
Intelligible:Please rate the extent to which it was easy or
difficult to understand what the voice was saying
Natural:How natural (pleasantly human-like) was the sound
of the voice?
Prosodic:To what extent were the elements of timing, pitch,
and emphasis appropriate for the messages?
Sociable:To what extent was the tone of voice socially and
emotionally appropriate for the messages?
Competent:Please rate your impression of the robot
(Incompetent or Competent)
Intelligent:Please rate your impression of the robot
(Unintelligent or Intelligent)
[7], contained four items asking whether the voice sounded
intelligible, natural, prosodic(ally appropriate), and sociable,
paired with two items from the perceived intelligence dimen-
sion of the Godspeed questionnaire [8]. We used the same for-
mat as [4], which standardized responses on an 11-point scale
(0–10) across MOS-X2 and Godspeed items (see Table 2).
2.4. Participants
160 participants were recruited from Prolific. All participants
were native English speakers residing in the United States or
Canada and were between 19 and 30 years old (M age = 25.34,
SD= 3.18). The sample included 91 females and 68 males
(one participant preferred not to indicate gender).
We recorded 40 speakers in each V oice Condition. The
sample size was informed by prior studies that manipulated
pitch and measured comprehension, mimicking the affective
versus monotonic condition in our study [28, 29]. They showed
that degrading pitch cues yielded significant accuracy differ-
ences in interpreting ambiguous syntactic distinctions. Because
power estimation for mixed-effects models is difficult without
pilot or simulated data, we used G*Power to approximate the
sample size based on the smallest effect reported in [28] (partial
η² = .103). G*Power suggested that a similar ANOV A with four
groups would require n = 154 to reach 95% power (α= 0.05),
which we adopted as a conservative benchmark.
3. Results
Our primary analysis on the robot training task was pre-
registered1. We noted there that we would also analyze ques-
tionnaires. While the present questionnaire analysis is different
from the preregistration, it follows the general logic of our pre-
registered analysis and is described in the following section.
3.1. Robot training task data
In each trial, we measured whether a participant decided that
the robot avatar’s voice mismatched (0) or matched (1) the tar-
get image. These responses were entered into a mixed-effects
logistic regression with several predictors: Whether the target
sentence was actually a match or not (Picture Match, dummy
coded);V oice Condition(which of the four voices was heard;
contrast coded as below);Comma Condition(With or Without
Comma; dummy coded); and the full set of interactions between
these three variables.
1Preregistration: https://osf.io/8ka5y
V oice Condition was coded such that the firstaffectiveness
contrastevaluated intonation (the two affective versus the two
monotonic conditions), the secondHuman-like/Machine-like
contrastexamined the effect of voice quality (the two human-
like versus machine-like conditions), and the thirdcongruency
contrastexplored whether human expectations about how in-
tonation and voice quality were congruent (Human-like Affec-
tive and Machine-like Monotonic conditions versus Human-like
Monotonic and Machine-like Affective conditions).
The maximal random-effects structure of this model con-
tained an intercept of Item (also classified as either a “DA”
or “List” sentence type) with a slope of V oice Condition, and
an intercept of Participant with slopes of Picture Match and
Comma Condition. Since this maximal model did not con-
verge, we further reduced the model by removing one slope at a
time. The maximal converged model had no slope on the item-
intercept and only the slope of Picture Match on the participant-
intercept. Results, evaluated using Type III Likelihood Ratio
Tests (LRTs), are shown in Table 3. Critically, there was a 3-
way interaction between Picture Match, V oice Condition, and
Comma. We focused on this most complex interaction to un-
derstand the lower-order effects in the model.
Table 3:Statistical results from omnibus models
Model results for robot training data
Effectχ 2 p-value
Picture Match 318.13<.001**
V oice Condition 7.57 .056 ˆ
Comma 225.80<.001**
Picture Match×V oice Condition 4.97 .17
Picture Match×Comma 458.47<.001**
V oice Condition×Comma 7.68 .053 ˆ
Picture Match×V oice Cond×Comma 9.93 .019 *
Model results for the questionnaire data
Effectχ 2 p-value
V oice Condition 6.24 .10
Question Item 210.35<.001**
AI Familiarity 88.02<.001**
V oice Condition×Question Item 14.03 .52
Note: **p <.001; *p <.05; ˆp <.10
As shown in Figure 2, there was a strong effect of Picture
Match: Participants rated target sentences as matching the pic-
ture when this was the case and vice versa (i.e., a measure of
accuracy). This accuracy effect also interacted with the factor
of Comma, such that participants rated the avatar’s voice as not
often marking prosodic boundaries, and were therefore more of-
ten correct when this was indeed the case in the Without Comma
condition (i.e., the Picture Match×Comma effect). Crucially,
this effect interacted with V oice Condition, where contrast anal-
ysis showed that Human-like differed from Machine-like voices
(β=−0.51,SE= 0.22,z=−2.29,p=.022), and Incon-
gruent from Congruent voices to a smaller degree (β= 0.44,
SE= 0.22,z= 1.99,p=.046). Overall, Machine-like
voices showed higher accuracy in the With Comma condition.
3.2. Questionnaire data
Our analysis of questionnaire data involved a composite score
from the two AI Familiarity questions, as well as the four ques-
tion items from MOS-X2 and two question items from God-
3723
Figure 2:Small dots represent participant data, while large dots and error bars represent model estimates and 95% CIs.A:Results
showing the interaction between Picture Match, Comma, and Voice Condition.B:Model estimates of correct responses across Voice
Condition and Comma conditions. Brackets show the distinct patterns of machine-like versus human-like voices (*p<.05).
speed. Those latter six questions (Table 2) were on an 11-
point Likert scale, such that higher ratings always indicated
better voice evaluations. They were predicted using a cumu-
lative link model (ordinal package in R [30]) by the composite
AI-Familiarity score, V oice Condition, Question Item (the six
questions in Table 2), and the interaction of V oice Condition
and Question Item.
Figure 3:Model estimates of how ratings on questionnaire
items changed for each Voice Condition contrast. Error bars
indicate 95% CIs (* p<.01).
Results are shown in Table 3: AI Familiarity predicted more
positive responses, and question items differed in mean rating.
Critically, there was no main effect or interaction of V oice Con-
dition (allp’s>.10). Figure 3 shows (uncorrected) post-hoc
comparisons of affectiveness, human/machine, and congruency
contrasts on question items. Affective voices were rated as more
natural (p<.01), while human-like voices were marginally
rated as sounding smarter than machine-like ones (p=.064).
4. Discussion
We asked how prosodic and indexical cues impact the compre-
hension of syntactically ambiguous sentences in TTS voices.
Our results revealed that understanding TTS voices that pro-
duced syntactic ambiguities—which can be resolved through
prosody—was very challenging for human users: Listeners of-
ten missed prosodic boundaries (i.e., commas). Pitch changes
to produce affective versus monotonic intonation did not im-
pact intelligibility, although did improve participants’ evalua-
tive ratings of naturalness. Surprisingly, however, intelligibility
increased when the voices soundedmoremachine-like (Figure
2), which participants also rated as marginally “less intelligent”
(Figure 3), likely because voice quality altered listeners’ expec-
tations about what TTS voices are capable of articulating.
The locus of this effect remains unclear. One possibility
is that participants were biased to assume robotic TTS voices
are not making prosodic boundaries, hence the greater accuracy
in the Without Comma condition. Crucially, a drop in accu-
racy in the With Comma condition was weaker for Machine-
like voices, suggesting that participants assumed that the robotic
voicesintendedto insert a prosodic boundary, even though pho-
netic cues to prosodic boundaries, including pause duration and
pitch contours, were identical to Human-like voices.
A non-mutually exclusive alternative is that participants lis-
tened more carefully when hearing a “less intelligent” Machine-
like voice, perhaps enhancing scrutiny of prosodic cues in our
task. However, we note that participants did not show a clear af-
fective advantage for Machine-like voices, nor did they show a
clear machine-like advantage in the Without Comma condition
(albeit ceiling performance in our current dataset). Future work
will need to examine measures of listening effort to adjudicate
among these possibilities.
Our study is not without limitations. Work on TTS voices
typically uses within-subjects designs so that participants can
compare voice manipulations. Future studies will thus include
different avatars, permitting such comparisons, while still main-
taining consistent expectations for individual avatars.
5. Conclusion
We showed that indexical aspects of TTS voices matter, likely
by modifying users’ expectations about an avatar’s vocal ca-
pabilities, shaping how closely they listen to and/or interpret
speech. TTS voices that better support prosodic interpretation
are essential, not only for improving user experience, but also
for reducing the risk of critical miscommunications.
3724
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
All authors are responsible and accountable for the work and
content of the paper. We disclose that generative AI was only
used for editing the manuscript for minor revisions. It was not
used for producing a significant part of the manuscript.