EchoLoc: Audio-Aware Object Grounding via Joint Heatmap and Box-Level
Localization
Junghwa Shin ID 1,∗, Yeonwoo Kim ID 1,∗, HyungJune Lee ID 1,2,∗∗
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ewha Womans University, South Korea
2 Division of Artificial Intelligence and Software, Ewha Womans University, South Korea
jungh1214@gmail.com, ynwoo34@ewha.ac.kr, hyungjune.lee@ewha.ac.kr
Abstract
Although recent multimodal models aim to jointly understand
images, text, and audio, they mostly focus on global-level rep-
resentations and remain limited in precise object-level ground-
ing. In particular, conventional text-image grounding models
struggle to leverage non-visual cues such as sound. We propose
an audio-aware grounding framework calledEchoLoc, based on
a query-based transformer detector of MDETR, incorporating
audio information to complement textual supervision and local-
ize sound-related visual regions. Our approach learns spatial
heatmap-based local cues through audio-visual alignment and
uses them to guide ROI-level object box prediction, enabling
the localization of sound-related visual regions even without
explicit bounding-box annotations. On Flickr-SoundNet-Test,
EchoLocyields +2.58% and +17.08% relative improvements in
cIoU (adap) and AUC (adap) over the state-of-the-art.
Index Terms: Audio-visual grounding, Sound source localiza-
tion, Multimodal representation learning
1. Introduction
Recent technology in artificial intelligence has expedited mul-
timodal learning. By integrating semantically aligned features
from multimodal datasets, models can understand images, text,
and audio within a unified framework. However, most mod-
els [1, 2] mainly focus on global correspondence and semantics,
but lack fine-grained object-level detection and localization.
To tackle the object-level localization, vision-language
grounding has made some considerable advances. By align-
ing natural language with visual regions, some representative
works [3, 4] localize objects by predicting bounding boxes un-
der an open-vocabulary setting. However, these methods rely
heavily on complete and semantically explicit captions, mak-
ing them sensitive to noisy or incomplete textual signals such
as those produced by automatic speech recognition (ASR).
Sound Source Localization (SSL) aims to localize the im-
age region corresponding to the sound in paired image-audio
samples. Since datasets with ground-truth sound source re-
gions are scarce, most previous studies [5, 6, 7, 8] rely on self-
supervised learning. Typically, contrastive learning approaches
learn localization cues in the form of audio-visual similarity
heatmap, which provides soft spatial evidence of sound source.
However, such heatmaps tend to be blurry, making it difficult to
obtain precise object-level bounding boxes. Moreover, because
converting a heatmap into a bounding box typically depends on
This work was supported by the National Research Founda-
tion(NRF), Korea, under project BK21 FOUR.
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
post-processing, which is not included in the training objective,
it is difficult to optimize end-to-end.
These limitations highlight a missing training signal that
connects sound cues to object-level predictions. Although
audio-visual alignment provides weak spatial cues, directly
learning object boxes with clear boundaries remains difficult
without box annotations. This raises a fundamental question:
How can we incorporate a pipeline for generating object can-
didates and selecting the sound-producing objects among them
into end-to-end training, using only limited audio-visual sig-
nals?In other words, we need a framework that predicts object
boxes without additional box annotations, while preserving lo-
cal, object-level grounding beyond global semantic alignment.
To address the problem of audio-aware object grounding,
we presentEchoLoc, which jointly trains heatmap prediction
and box prediction modules. The heatmap module is trained via
spatial and global contrastive learning. To effectively train the
box prediction module, datasets with bounding box annotations
corresponding to sounds are required, but they are very scarce.
To tackle scarcity, we generate a pseudo bounding box from the
audio-visual similarity map obtained from the heatmap module
and use it as supervision for training the box prediction module.
Despite this effort, training with pseudo boxes can lead to
a bootstrap paradox, because it becomes unstable for a model
to learn from its own predictions. We adopt a query-based de-
tection model to generate diverse audio-conditioned candidate
boxes and select the one with the highest audio-visual similar-
ity as the final box prediction. In this way, we do not treat the
pseudo box as a hard target; instead, it encourages exploration
during candidate generation and yields more stable predictions
by leveraging heatmap-based signals. As such, the heatmap and
box prediction modules can be co-trained in a complementary
manner, allowing the box predictor to refine heatmap-derived
localization cues into object-level predictions.
In summary, our contributions are threefold:
• We propose an audio-aware grounding framework,EchoLoc,
based on a query-based transformer detector of MDETR [3],
incorporating audio information to complement textual su-
pervision and localize sound-related visual regions.
• Our approach learns spatial heatmap-based local cues
through audio-visual alignment and then uses them to guide
ROI-level object box prediction, enabling fine-grained local-
ization of sound-related visual regions even without explicit
bounding-box annotations.
•EchoLocachieves 36.36 cIoU and 38.28 AUC on VGG-
SS, and shows strong adaptive localization performance on
Flickr-SoundNet-Test, yielding +2.58% and +17.08% rela-
tive improvements in cIoU(adap) and AUC(adap) over the
state-of-the-art.
1116
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2320
2. Methods
2.1. Architecture
We proposeEchoLoc, an audio-aware object grounding frame-
work that jointly performs heatmap-based and box-level local-
ization, as illustrated in Figure 1. Each input sample consists
of a single image frame and an audio signal generated within
the same scene. Two modalities are independently encoded into
feature representations using modality-specific encoders. For
the visual stream, the input image is transformed into an object-
centric visual feature map using a ResNet-101 backbone initial-
ized with weights pre-trained in MDETR [3].
For the audio stream, we adopt Pretrained Audio Neural
Networks (PANNs) [9] and use a frozen CNN14 as the audio
backbone to encode the input audio into a global feature repre-
sentation. We avoid heavier transformer-based audio encoders
such as AST [10] due to their parameter overhead and compu-
tational complexity. The resulting visual feature map and au-
dio feature are then fed into subsequent modules. The overall
framework consists of two parallel modules that share the same
input features.
The box prediction module is an audio-conditioned, object-
centric branch based on the transformer architecture employed
in MDETR [3]. The visual feature map and the global audio
feature are jointly fed into the transformer encoder, enabling
an early fusion mechanism where cross-modal self-attention
inherently produces audio-aware visual features. This allows
the model to integrally capture visual context related to the
sound. The transformer decoder then processes object queries
by attending to the fused audio-visual features and directly out-
puts the bounding box coordinates corresponding to the sound-
producing object within the image. This module is responsi-
ble for accurately estimating object boundaries with clear visual
structures.
The heatmap prediction module is a localization compo-
nent that estimates sound-generating regions. We compute an
audio-visual similarity heatmap by measuring pixel-wise simi-
larity between the audio features and individual spatial locations
in the visual feature map. The heatmap provides soft spatial ev-
idence of sound source locations and is later used to generate
pseudo boxes for training the box prediction module.
2.2. Training
To train the model to localize the sound-producing regions ef-
fectively and encourage more object-centric bounding boxes,
we leverage both heatmap prediction and box prediction mod-
ules. The heatmap module is trained through contrastive learn-
ing on image-audio pairs. In particular, we utilize both spatial
contrastive learning and global contrastive learning. Bounding-
box annotations aligned with the audio are required to train the
box prediction module, but such datasets are scarce. Therefore,
we adopt a self-supervised strategy to generate pseudo boxes
from the audio–visual similarity map predicted by the heatmap
module and to use them to supervise the box prediction module.
2.2.1. Spatial contrastive loss
We usesspa as a spatial similarity for localization, which encour-
ages the model to highlight sound-producing regions.s spa(i,j)
is defined as below:
sspa(i,j) = log
 HX
x=1
WX
y=1
exp
 
⟨Vi(x,y),a j⟩

!
(1)
whereV i denotes the visual feature map of thei-th image sam-
ple,V i(x,y)denotes the visual feature vector at spatial loca-
tion(x,y), anda j is the audio feature vector of thej-th audio
sample.⟨·,·⟩denotes the inner product of two feature vectors.
Sinces spa(i,j)aggregates spatial similarities via log-sum-exp
pooling, increasing the similarity at a few highly relevant lo-
cations contributes more than uniformly increasing similarities
across the entire image. It encourages the model to focus on
regions that correspond to the sound source.
The contrastive loss based ons spa is defined as below:
Lspa =− 1
B
BX
i=1
log exp (sspa(i,i)/τ)PB
j=1 exp (sspa(i,j)/τ)
(2)
whereBis a batch size. This loss increases the similarity of
positive pairs while decreasing that of negative pairs.
The above formulation is a one-way contrastive loss using
the image as an anchor. In practice, we additionally compute
the loss in the reverse direction and use the average of the two
losses as the final loss.
2.2.2. Global contrastive loss
We uses glob as a global similarity for semantic feature align-
ment, which aligns the overall scene semantics between audio
and vision, as in previous study [8].s glob(i,j)is defined as be-
low:
¯vi = 1
HW
HX
x=1
WX
y=1
Vi(x,y);s glob(i,j) =⟨ ¯vi,a j⟩(3)
where ¯vi denotes the globally pooled visual feature vector of
thei-th image sample, which is computed by spatial averaging
of the visual feature mapV i.s glob(i,j)is obtained by simple
inner product of the two feature vectors. Unlikes spa, which
emphasizes spatial localization,s glob aligns audio and vision at
the scene level by matching globally pooled representations.
We then apply the same contrastive learning objective as
inL spa, replacings spa withs glob to obtainL glob (and similarly
average the two directions).
2.2.3. Box prediction loss
Now we train the detection head for bounding box predic-
tion, using pseudo boxes generated from the heatmap prediction
module. Specifically, for each image, we first identify a region
that covers the top-αprobability mass of the audio-visual sim-
ilarity map, and then convert the tight bounding box of this re-
gion into a pseudo ground-truth box ˆbi = (cx,c y,w,h)in nor-
malized coordinates. To obtain the optimal matching between
the model-predicted query boxes{b q}N
q=1 and the pseudo
boxes, we apply the Hungarian matching, as in DETR [11]. The
matching cost follows MDETR [3] and is based on a weighted
sum of an audio-conditioned classification cost and box costs.
Once the matching is completed, we compute the classification
and box regression losses for the matched pairs. For the clas-
sification loss, we follow MDETR and apply a cross-entropy
loss on the per-query classification logits; however, we replace
MDETR’s original formulation for text-token alignment with an
audio-conditioned one. The box regression loss is also defined
as in MDETR, using a linear combination of the L1 loss and the
Generalized IoU (GIoU) loss.
Finally, we use the total lossL=L spa +L glob +L box,
combining spatial localization, global semantic alignment, and
box localization.
1117
Figure 1:Overall architecture of EchoLoc: (1) An image–audio pair is encoded by modality-specific encoders; (2) The Box Prediction
Module fuses both modalities via a Fusion encoder and uses object queries in a Box decoder to predict audio-guided bounding boxes;
(3) The Heatmap Prediction Module generates sound-source heatmaps via audio–visual similarity; and (4) Two modules jointly enable
complementary hard and soft grounding
3. Experiments
3.1. Experimental setup
For training, we use two audio-visual datasets, VGGSound [12]
and Flickr-SoundNet-144K [13], which are widely adopted in
prior A VSL studies. Specifically, we leverage VGGSound, con-
taining approximately 200k video clips, and construct 144k im-
age–audio pairs from Flickr-SoundNet-144K. For evaluation,
we adopt VGG-SS [6] and Flickr-SoundNet-Test [5], both of
which provide manually annotated sound source labels. Each
evaluation set contains approximately 5,000 image–audio pairs
with bounding-box annotations indicating sound-generating re-
gions in the visual frame.
We train our model using a batch size of 32 on a single
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU (24 GB VRAM). All exper-
iments are optimized using the AdamW optimizer [14]. The
classification, bounding box regression, and GIoU losses are
weighted by 0.5, 2.5, and 1.0, respectively. We set the pseudo
mass threshold to 0.4 and the heatmap temperature parameter to
0.15. The model is trained for 40 epochs, which takes approxi-
mately 15 hours.
3.2. Audio-based visual grounding
In this section, we quantitatively compareEchoLocwith
prior sound source localization methods on VGG-SS, Flickr-
SoundNet-Test benchmarks as presented in Table 1. We train
on VGGSound and evaluate on VGG-SS, and train on Flickr-
SoundNet-144K and evaluate on Flickr-SoundNet-Test. We re-
port results of prior methods trained with the same amount of
data for fair comparison.
Following prior related work, we report cIoU and AUC.
Since fixed-threshold cIoU can be sensitive to selection of
threshold, we additionally report adaptive metrics proposed in
[15], including cIoU (adap) and AUC (adap).
As shown in Table 1,EchoLocachieves 36.36 cIoU and
38.28 AUC on VGG-SS. AlthoughEchoLocis not state-of-
the-art on all fixed-threshold metrics, these results indicate that
the proposed framework remains effective for audio-aware ob-
ject grounding without explicit bounding-box annotations. On
Flickr-SoundNet-Test,EchoLocachieves 84.34 cIoU and shows
strong adaptive performance, with 88.22 cIoU (adap) and 79.99
AUC (adap). The lower fixed-threshold AUC may be partly ex-
plained by calibration sensitivity and differences in the heatmap
scale or distribution, while the adaptive results still show strong
gains in ambiguous multi-instance scenes.
The results show thatEchoLocachieves its strongest rel-
ative gains on the Flickr-SoundNet dataset, particularly under
adaptive evaluation. Since VGGSound provides a single sound-
event class label per clip and is typically dominated by a salient
sound source with relatively clean audio-visual correspondence,
an audio-visual alignment-based approach would be advanta-
geous. Flickr-SoundNet, on the other hand, is more uncon-
strained and often involves ambiguous audio-visual correspon-
dence. Thus, EchoLoc performs audio-conditioned object-level
soft grounding, which is particularly beneficial under adaptive
evaluation. This suggests thatEchoLocis better suited to am-
biguous and multi-instance scenes, where localization requires
disambiguating potential visual sound sources.
3.3. Ablation study
We conduct an ablation study comparing two settings: using
only the heatmap prediction module and using both the heatmap
and the box prediction modules (Table 2). In this experiment,
we isolate the effect of the box prediction module, while keep-
ing other settings unchanged. Using only the heatmap predic-
tion module,EchoLocachieves the cIoU of 31.73 and the AUC
of 32.06. Adding an additional box module significantly im-
proves both metrics, increasing cIoU to 36.36(+4.63) and AUC
to 38.28(+6.22).
This improvement comes from using heatmap-derived po-
sitional cues: the heatmap-only model localizes rough sound
areas, and the box prediction module learns clearer object-level
boundaries. This result shows that the heatmap-only model can
localize rough sound-producing regions, while the box predic-
tion module further helps the model learn object-wise bound-
ary information, enhancing precision and consistency. In other
words, the proposed box prediction module acts as a key factor
in elevating heatmap-based localization to object-aware local-
1118
Table 1:Audio-Visual Grounding Results on VGG-SS and Flickr-SoundNet Testsets
Method VGG-SS Flickr-SoundNet
cIoU↑cIoU(adap)↑AUC↑AUC(adap)↑cIoU↑cIoU(adap)↑AUC↑AUC(adap)↑
Attention [5] 18.50 – 30.20 – 66.00 – 55.80 –
CoarseToFine [16] 29.10 – 34.80 – – – – –
LCBM [17] 32.20 – 36.60 – – – – –
LVS [6] 30.30 40.47 36.40 41.75 71.20 77.20 58.06 62.72
HardPos [18] 34.60 – 38.00 – 75.20 – 59.70 –
SSPL [19] 27.00 – 34.80 – 69.90 – 58.00 –
EZ-VSL [7] 35.96 43.52 38.20 42.41 72.80 78.00 58.82 63.82
SLA VC [20] 37.79 49.41 39.40 45.79 – – – –
MarginNCE [21] 38.25 50.7639.0646.39 84.7486.00 63.0868.32
FNAC [22]39.5047.0039.6643.30 78.71 84.40 59.33 64.16
EchoLoc(Ours)36.36 44.31 38.28 41.19 84.34 88.2254.2979.99
Table 2:Ablation results on VGG-SS, showing the impact of
adding the box prediction module in EchoLoc
Method VGG-SS
cIoU↑AUC↑
Only heatmap prediction module 31.73 32.06
Heatmap module + Box prediction head36.36 38.28
ization.
3.4. Discussion: Complementary audio cues under weak
textual supervision
Real-world multimodal videos are often accompanied by imper-
fect textual signals rather than carefully curated captions. Under
such weak textual supervision, text-based grounding methods
that rely on explicit noun phrases become unstable; while they
can predict precise object boundaries under ideal conditions,
their reliability often degrades when descriptions are noisy or
under-specified. In contrast,EchoLocleverages audio cues
to estimate sound-generating regions and produces more fine-
grained soft localization in the form of heatmaps, even when
textual information is insufficient. As illustrated in Figure 2 on
the VGG-SS dataset, the heatmap provides a continuous spatial
distribution that successfully captures audio–visual contextual
consistency, instead of enforcing a single hard boundary.
These observations suggest that text-based grounding and
audio-based localization provide complementary supervisory
signals. While text excels at precise boundary prediction given
clear linguistic instructions, audio serves as auxiliary and or-
thogonal cues when reliable text is difficult to obtain. Thus,
EchoLoccomplements text-based grounding by offering robust
localization cues under weak textual supervision.
4. Conclusion
We have presentedEchoLoc, an audio-aware grounding frame-
work that jointly performs heatmap-based and box-level lo-
calization. On the Flickr-SoundNet benchmark,EchoLochas
achieved 88.22 cIoU (adap) and 79.99 AUC (adap), demon-
strating the effectiveness of integrating audio-guided heatmap
cues with object-centric box prediction. Our key contribution
is to train a heatmap module via spatial and global contrastive
learning, and use pseudo boxes generated from the predicted
Figure 2:Qualitative comparison of sound source localiza-
tion on the VGG-SS dataset under weak textual supervision.
MDETR produces hard, object-centric predictions biased to-
ward salient visual objects, whereas EchoLoc generates soft,
audio-guided heatmaps.
heatmap as supervision for training the box prediction module.
In this way,EchoLocyields more precise object-centric boxes
while also providing heatmap-based soft localization.
Despite these advantages, box-level predictions depend on
the quality of the underlying heatmap estimation, since both
pseudo supervision and box selection are guided by heatmap-
based audio-visual similarity. As future work, we may improve
the robustness of heatmap learning by incorporating additional
training signals, such as explicit positive and negative audio-
visual pairs explored in prior studies, and investigate strategies
that can reduce the dependency of box prediction on heatmap
quality.
1119
5. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used solely for language editing and
proofreading of this manuscript. All technical content, method-
ology, experiments, and conclusions were developed and veri-
fied by the authors.