ALFreeD: Teacher-Guided Few-Shot Pronunciation Assessment via
Segmentation-Free Deviation Modeling
Meenakshi Sirigiraju1, Nevin K Mathew2, Reni K Cherian2, Chiranjeevi Yarra1
1 Speech Processing Lab, Language Technologies Research Center (LTRC), IIITH, India
2 CSE, Saintgits College of Engineering, Kottayam, India
meenakshi.sirigiraju@research.iiit.ac.in, chiranjeevi.yarra@iiit.ac.in
Abstract
Automatic pronunciation assessment (APA) of L2 learners is
critical in computer-assisted language learning. Existing ap-
proaches typically rely on canonical phonemes, its aligned
boundaries and large labeled data, which is costly and cumber-
some. To address these, we propose ALFreeD, a segmentation-
free APA framework guided by teacher’s speech without the
need of canonical phonemes using minimal labeled data. In
this, pronunciation quality is assessed by quantifying deviation
between learners’ and teacher’s utterances. First, frame-level
embeddings are extracted using HuBERT, and deviation scores
are computed between them after obtaining their temporal cor-
respondence with DTW. Next, utterance level pronunciation de-
viation vector is obtained by suppressing variabilities other than
pronunciation quality with i-vector framework and is passed to
a MLP for predicting quality. Experiments on SpeechOcean762
demonstrate competitive performance with recent E2E methods
using minimal labeled data.
Index Terms: Automatic pronunciation assessment, CALL,
HuBERT, i-vector, DTW
1. Introduction
The number of second language (L2) learners has increased
substantially over the past decades due to globalization and the
expansion of digital education platforms [1]. As a result, En-
glish has become a global lingua franca in academic and profes-
sional communication. The increasing reliance on spoken inter-
action has made oral proficiency essential. Among its various
components, pronunciation plays a decisive role in intelligibil-
ity and communicative effectiveness [2]. Even when grammat-
ical and lexical competence are sufficient, pronunciation errors
can significantly reduce comprehensibility [3]. Consequently,
providing accurate and timely pronunciation feedback is essen-
tial for supporting L2 learners.
To enable scalable feedback, computer-assisted language
learning (CALL) systems have incorporated automatic pro-
nunciation assessment (APA) modules [4]. APA systems are
designed to evaluate learner speech automatically and pro-
vide objective feedback. In their early development, APA ap-
proaches were largely built upon automatic speech recognition
(ASR) frameworks [5]. In these systems, learner speech was
force-aligned to canonical phoneme transcriptions, and pronun-
ciation quality was estimated using acoustic likelihoods de-
rived from hidden Markov models (HMMs) [6]. Building on
this likelihood-based scoring, posterior-based measures such as
Goodness of Pronunciation (GOP) were later introduced to im-
prove phoneme-level scoring reliability [5].
Although alignment-based methods have achieved promis-
ing results, they rely on a critical assumption: learner speech
can be reliably segmented according to native canonical
phoneme boundaries. This assumption becomes problematic
when non-native pronunciations deviate substantially from ex-
pected patterns. In such cases, forced alignment may produce
inaccurate phoneme boundaries. Moreover, mispronunciations
are constrained to fit the expected phoneme sequence. As a
result, substitutions, insertions, and deletions may be misrep-
resented or overlooked without manual phoneme annotations.
These boundary errors propagate to the pronunciation scoring
mechanism and lead to unstable or biased assessment outcomes.
To address these alignment-related limitations, subsequent
research focused on improving scoring robustness through re-
fined posterior normalization techniques [7], discriminative
training strategies [8], and the integration of prosodic and
suprasegmental features [9, 10]. Collectively, these approaches
improved pronunciation scoring accuracy and stability under
certain conditions. Later deep neural networks (DNNs) re-
placed traditional HMM-based systems and improved posterior
estimation [11]. Subsequently, end-to-end (E2E) architectures
were proposed to predict pronunciation scores directly from
acoustic features [12, 13, 14]. While these neural approaches
reduced reliance on handcrafted features, they introduced a new
dependency on large-scale labeled training data. More recently,
self-supervised speech representation learning has emerged as a
promising alternative to heavy reliance on labeled data. Models
such as wav2vec 2.0 and HuBERT learn rich acoustic represen-
tations from large-scale unlabeled speech [15, 16]. These rep-
resentations capture phonetic and contextual information and
generalize across speakers and recording conditions. Conse-
quently, representation-based approaches have been explored
for pronunciation assessment [17, 18]. However, still depen-
dence on forced alignments and labeled data scarcity remains a
challenge.
To address these limitations, we propose a framework AL-
FreeD, that eliminates reliance on canonical phonemes and
aligned boundaries with minimal labeled supervision for APA
modeling. The framework encodes teacher and learner speech
using embeddings extracted from HuBERT [16]. Dynamic
Time Warping (DTW) is then applied to establish an optimal
alignment directly in the learned representation space [19] of
HuBERT. Unlike ASR-based alignment, this approach does not
assume canonical phoneme boundaries and is therefore less
sensitive to non-native pronunciation deviations [20]. Frame-
level deviation scores are derived along the resulting alignment
path to quantify pronunciation deviations between learner’s and
teacher’s speech. Then to suppress the variabilities other than
pronunciation quality, the i-vector framework [21] is adopted
to obtain utterance-level pronunciation deviation vector [22].
These vectors are subsequently used to train a multilayer per-
ceptron (MLP) that predicts pronunciation scores from limited
3781
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3247
HuBERT
Pretrained
Model
Teacher (T)
Learner (L)
 Deviation
vector
computation
Pronunciation
Score 
Prediction Learner-Aligned Deviation
Scores Extraction 
Ratings
Figure 1:Block diagram of the proposed flow of pronunciation
assessment
labeled samples. The effectiveness of the proposed framework
is validated on the Speechocean762 dataset [23].
2. Background and Motivation
Self-supervised learning has enabled speech models to learn
acoustic and phonetic information without requiring large-scale
phonetic annotation. Among these models, HuBERT (Hidden-
Unit BERT) [16] has emerged as a prominent framework due
to its innovative two-stage training paradigm. In the first stage,
the input speech sample is segmented and quantized into dis-
crete hidden units using unsupervised clustering. These units
serve as pseudo-labels for the second stage, where the model is
trained to predict masked units from input speech. This setup
encourages HuBERT to capture both fine-grained acoustic de-
tail and broader phonetic context through contextualized repre-
sentations.
Several studies have examined the properties of HuBERT
representations in pronunciation-related tasks. Kim et al.[17]
applied HuBERT for phoneme-level assessment, demonstrating
its ability to localize errors. Wells et al.[24] analyzed the struc-
ture of HuBERT’s representation space and found that phoneme
categories exhibit separation and that embeddings generalize
across speakers, indicating speaker invariance. Zahran et al.[18]
compared multiple self-supervised models and found HuBERT
to be effective in capturing phonetic distinctions while main-
taining robustness to speaker variation. While these works uti-
lized HuBERT representations for pronunciation-related tasks,
they assumed that the separation between correct and incorrect
pronunciations would be learned implicitly through supervised
training.
Stops Affricates Fricatives
Approximants Nasals Mid Vowels
Figure 2:HuBERT representational space of teacher and
learner, indicated as◦and×, respectively, for MOA and vowel
categories.
3. Proposed Method
3.1. Overview
The overall pipeline of the proposed ALFreeD framework for
APA is illustrated in Figure 1. Given a teacher’s utterance, the
learner’s utterance is assessed to predict a pronunciation qual-
ity score. To achieve this, contextualized frame-level embed-
dings are extracted from both teacher and learner utterances us-
ing a pre-trained HuBERT model. Next, frame-level temporal
correspondence between the two utterances is obtained using
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW), where the optimal alignment
path is determined based on cosine distance as the deviation
metric. Along this alignment path, frame-level deviation scores
are computed and the i-vector framework is applied to derive
an utterance-level pronunciation deviation vector while reduc-
ing variability unrelated to pronunciation quality. Finally, the
deviation vector is fed into an MLP to predict the pronunciation
quality score.
Algorithm 1Learner-Aligned Frame-Level Deviation Scores
Extraction
1:Input:Teacher embeddingsT={t i}DT
i=1, Learner embed-
dingsL={l j}DL
j=1
2:Output:Deviation sequence∆ ={δ j}DL
j=1
3:Compute cosine distance matrixD(i,j) = 1−
t⊤
i lj
∥ti∥∥lj∥
4:Obtain optimal alignment pathP={(i k,j k)}K
k=1 using
DTW
5:forj= 1toD L do
6:I(j)←{i k|(i k,j k)∈P,j k =j}
7:δ j← 1
|I(j)|
P
i∈I(j)D(i,j)
8:end for
9:∆←{δ j}DL
j=1
3.2. Teacher-Learner Representational space
Previous works analyzed HuBERT representations of native
speech and directly used them to build supervised models for
mispronunciation detection and assessment. However, these
works did not examine how learner mispronunciations differ
from correct pronunications in the representational space, leav-
ing it unclear why and how these models work. Building on this,
we explored the shared space of teacher and learner representa-
tions. In this analysis, we use forced aligned phoneme bound-
aries in teacher’s and learner’s speech, with native English
speech considered as the teacher’s speech. Using these align-
ments, we averaged HuBERT representations across phonemes
and visualized them with t-SNE, for each Manner of articula-
tion (MOA) category and V owels of Mid category as shown
in Figure 2. The results reveal that same-phoneme represen-
tations from teacher and learner cluster closely, while different
phonemes deviate. Also, within the same phoneme category
teacher and learner’s representation has separation. These ob-
servations are consistent in other vowel categories as well (high
and low). For compactness, we provided the analysis with only
Mid category. The observations from the figure suggest that
teacher representations can guide detection of learner speech
deviations.
3.3. Learner-Aligned Deviation Scores Extraction
Given teacher and learner utterances, frame-level embeddings
are first extracted using a pre-trained HuBERT model to ob-
tain two embedding sequences,T={t i}DT
i=1 for the teacher
andL={l j}DL
j=1 for the learner, wheret i,l j ∈R d de-
noted-dimensional embeddings. These embeddings provide a
shared representation space that captures phonetic and contex-
tual information, enabling direct comparison between teacher
and learner utterances. Based on these embeddings, the sim-
ilarity between the two sequences is quantified by computing
a pairwise cosine distance matrixD∈R DT×DL, where each
elementD(i,j) = 1−
t⊤
i lj
∥ti∥∥lj∥ measures the pronunciation
3782
deviation between teacher framet i and learner framel j. How-
ever, due to temporal variability in speech, a direct one-to-one
correspondence between teacher and learner embeddings is not
feasible. To address this, Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is
applied to the distance matrix to obtain an optimal alignment
pathP={(i k,j k)}K
k=1 that aligns the two sequences while
minimizing the cumulative distance, subject to the following
constraints:
•Boundary:(i 1,j 1) = (1,1)and(i |P|,j|P|) = (DT,D L).
•Monotonicity:i k+1≥i k,j k+1≥j k,∀k.
•Continuity:i k+1−i k≤1,j k+1−j k≤1,∀k.
Based on this alignment path, frame-level deviation scores
are extracted for the learner sequence. Specifically, for each
learner framej, all teacher frames aligned with it along the
DTW path are identified asI(j) ={i k|(i k,j k)∈P, j k =
j}. The deviation score for the learner frame is then defined
as the average cosine distance between the learner frame and
its aligned teacher frames,δ j = 1
|I(j)|
P
i∈I(j)D(i,j). This
aggregation is performed to handle many-to-one frame corre-
spondences produced by the alignment path. Repeating this
process for all learner frames yields a deviation score sequence
∆ ={δ j}DL
j=1, where each element quantifies the local pro-
nunciation deviation of the learner with respect to the teacher.
The implementation of this procedure is summarized in Algo-
rithm 1.
3.4. Deviation V ector Computation
The frame-level deviation score sequence obtained in Sec-
tion 3.3 reflects the local pronunciation differences between the
teacher and learner utterances. However, this sequence may
also contain variabilities arising from factors other than pro-
nunciation quality. To suppress such variabilities and obtain an
utterance-level representation of pronunciation deviation, the i-
vector framework is employed [22].
Teacher’s Pronunciation Deviation Modeling:To model
the pronunciation deviation distribution corresponding to good
pronunciation quality, a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) with
Kcomponents is trained as a Universal Background Model
(UBM) using deviation scores computed between teacher ut-
terances. Since teacher utterances represent good pronuncia-
tion quality, this model captures the statistical distribution of
teacher-to-teacher deviations in the embedding space and serves
as a background model for pronunciation deviation modeling.
The UBM parameters are denoted as{µ k,σ k,λ k}K
k=1, where
µk andσ k represent the mean and variance of thek-th com-
ponent andλ k denotes the corresponding mixture weight. The
diagonal covariance matrix isΣ = diag(σ 1,...,σ K)and the
UBM mean supervector is defined asm= [µ 1,...,µ K]T .
Learner Deviation V ector Modeling:To obtain an
utterance-level pronunciation deviation representation, the devi-
ation vector is modeled asMu =m+Vw u+ϵu, whereVis the
deviation variability matrix,w u∈R r is the learner deviation
vector, andϵ u∼N(0,Σ)represents residual noise. Intuitively,
the matrixVdefines a subspace that captures the dominant vari-
ability in pronunciation deviation patterns across utterances. In
our formulation,Vis estimated using teacher–learner deviation
sequences so that it captures pronunciation quality related vari-
ability. To estimate the learner deviation vectorw u, utterance-
level statistics derived from the deviation sequence are required.
Utterance-Level Statistics:Given the deviation sequence
∆u, the posterior probability of each mixture component is
computed asγ k,j =p(k|δ j)using the UBM. These pos-
terior probabilities indicate how strongly each deviation value
is associated with a particular Gaussian component. Us-
ing these responsibilities, the zeroth and first-order sufficient
statistics are computed asN k = PDL
j=1γk,j andF k =PDL
j=1γk,jδj. The accumulated statistics are then represented
asN= diag(N 1,...,N K)andF= [F 1,...,F K]T . Using
these statistics, the posterior estimate of the learner deviation
vector is obtained asw u = (I+V T Σ−1NV)−1V T Σ−1F,
which yields the utterance-level pronunciation deviation vector.
3.5. Pronunciation Score Prediction
The deviation vectorw u is used as input to a two-layer mul-
tilayer perceptron (MLP) to predict the pronunciation quality
score. The MLP consists of two fully connected layers with
ReLU activation, followed by a softmax output layer. Only the
MLP parameters are optimized using labeled pronunciation rat-
ings, while all preceding components operate without labeled
supervision.
4. Experimental Setup
4.1. Dataset
Speechocean762 [23] is a publicly available dataset designed
for English pronunciation assessment. It contains 5,000 ut-
terances spoken by 250 Mandarin-speaking L2 learners. The
data are divided into 2,500 training and 2,500 testing utterances.
Each learner reads 20 prompted sentences. The recordings total
approximately six hours of speech. The speakers include both
children and adults with balanced gender distribution. Each ut-
terance is rated independently by five expert annotators. The
ratings include an utterance-level total pronunciation accuracy
score ranging from 0 to 10. In this work, we use this utterance-
level score as the target label. For each sample, the median
of the five expert ratings is taken as the ground-truth score.
Teacher utterances were synthesized using Google TTS with
male and female voices for each unique stimulus with a US En-
glish accent.
4.2. Implementation Details
Frame-level representations are extracted using the pretrained
HuBERT-base model. We evaluate embeddings from all trans-
former layers to analyze layer-wise behavior. The devia-
tion distributions are modeled using a diagonal-covariance
GMM as the Universal Background Model, where the num-
ber of mixture components is varied over{4,8,16,32,64}.
The dimensionality of the i-vector representation is var-
ied over{5,10,20,30,50,100}. Only the MLP parame-
ters are optimized using labeled pronunciation ratings, while
all preceding components require no lables. The network
is trained using cross-entropy loss and the Adam optimizer.
The number of labeled training utterances is varied over
{300,500,1000,2000,2500}to analyze performance under
limited supervision. For each setting, samples are drawn uni-
formly across the 10 rating levels to maintain class balance.
4.2.1. Baselines:
•GOP-based:It is widely used as unsupervised baseline in
APA. It measures pronunciation quality based on phoneme
posterior probabilities derived from acoustic models of ASR
[25].
•GOPT:GOPT [12] is a transformer-based E2E pronuncia-
tion assessment model that predicts pronunciation scores di-
3783
Figure 3:Layer-wise performance of HuBERT embeddings with
varying labelled samples
rectly from speech representations.
•3M:The 3M model [13] is a multi-task learning framework
that jointly models pronunciation assessment and auxiliary
pronunciation-related tasks to improve scoring performance.
•HiPAMA:HiPAMA [14] is an end-to-end pronunciation as-
sessment approach that utilizes hierarchical phoneme-aware
modeling for pronunciation scoring.
Table 1:Correlation comparison of proposed ALFreeD with
baselines
Baselines Proposed (Few-Shot Setting)
GOP GOPT 3M HiPAMA 300 500 1000 2000 2500
0.62 0.71 0.76 0.73 0.68 0.69 0.71 0.72 0.74
5. Results
5.1. Comparison with Baselines
Table 1 compares the proposed ALFreeD framework with tradi-
tional GOP-based pronunciation assessment and recent end-to-
end approaches including GOPT, 3M, and HiPAMA. With only
300 labeled samples, the proposed method achieves a Pearson
correlation of 0.68, corresponding to a relative improvement of
9.7% over the GOP baseline (0.62). As the number of labeled
samples increases, the performance improves steadily, reach-
ing 0.74 with 2500 labeled samples, corresponding to a rela-
tive improvement of 19.4% over GOP. Recent end-to-end ap-
proaches such as GOPT and HiPAMA achieve correlations of
0.71 and 0.73 respectively, while the 3M model achieves the
highest performance of 0.76. Notably, with only 1000 labeled
samples the proposed framework already reaches a correlation
of 0.71, which is comparable to GOPT. Increasing the labeled
data further to 2000 samples improves the performance to 0.72,
approaching the performance of HiPAMA.
When the full labeled training set (2500 samples) is used,
the proposed method achieves a correlation of 0.74, which is on
par with the performance of the 3M model. These results indi-
cate that explicit modeling of teacher–learner pronunciation de-
viations provides a strong signal for pronunciation assessment,
allowing the proposed framework to achieve competitive per-
formance with significantly fewer labeled samples compared to
fully supervised E2E models which requires alignments.
5.2. Layer-wise Analysis of HuBERT Representations
Figure 3 shows the Pearson correlation obtained using embed-
dings extracted from all transformer layers of HuBERT-base
model. The performance gradually improves from lower layers
Figure 4:Effect of the number of GMM components and devia-
tion embedding dimension
and reaches its maximum around layer 7, after which a slight de-
cline is observed. Lower HuBERT layers mainly capture acous-
tic characteristics such as spectral structure and speaker vari-
ability, which are less informative for APA. As the layer depth
increases, the representations encode richer phonetic informa-
tion, which improves the ability to detect pronunciation devia-
tions between teacher and learner utterances. The best perfor-
mance observed in the middle layers suggests that these layers
provide a suitable balance between acoustic and phonetic infor-
mation. In contrast, higher layers tend to capture more abstract
linguistic patterns associated with the HuBERT pretraining ob-
jective, which reduces sensitivity to fine-grained pronunciation
differences and results in a slight performance degradation.
5.3. Effect of GMM Components and Deviation Embed-
ding Dimension
Figure 4 shows the performance obtained with different num-
bers of GMM components and deviation embedding dimen-
sions. The correlation increases as the number of mixture com-
ponents increases from 4 to 32, achieving the best performance
of 0.74 with 32 components and embedding dimension 10.
A small number of mixture components provides limited
modeling capacity for the deviation distribution. Increasing the
number of components enables the model to better capture pro-
nunciation deviation patterns. However, when the number of
components exceeds 32, the performance slightly decreases,
likely due to less stable estimation of mixture statistics given
the available training data. The deviation embedding dimen-
sion also influences performance. Very small dimensions may
fail to capture sufficient variability in pronunciation deviations,
while excessively large dimensions introduce redundant varia-
tions unrelated to pronunciation quality.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we proposed ALFreeD, a segmentation-free
framework for automatic pronunciation assessment guided by
teacher’s speech without relying on canonical phonemes. The
proposed method assesses pronunciation quality by quantifying
the deviation between learners’ and teacher’s utterances with an
utterance-level pronunciation deviation vector. Experiments on
the SpeechOcean762 dataset show that the proposed approach
achieves competitive performance with recent E2E methods
while using minimal labeled data. Future work will focus on
phonetic-level deviation modeling for APA.
3784
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used to assist in improving the clarity
and polishing the manuscript. All technical content, analysis,
and conclusions were developed and verified by the authors.