ESPnet3: Infrastructure for Scalable Speech and Audio Research
in the Foundation Model Era
Masao Someki* ID 1, Alexander Polok ID 2, Carlos Carvalho ID 3, Chyi-Jiunn Lin ID 1, Da-Hee Yang ID
1,4, Jiatong Shi ID 1, Jinchuan Tian ID 1, Nelson Enrique Yalta Soplin ID 5, Samuele Cornell ID 1,
Siddhant Arora ID 1, Francisco Teixeira ID 3, Wei Wang ID 6, William Chen ID 1, Alberto Abad ID 3,
Chenda Li ID 6, Shinji Watanabe ID 1, Wangyou Zhang ID 6
1 Carnegie Mellon University, USA, 2 Brno University of Technology, Czechia,
3 Instituto Superior Técnico, Portugal, 4 Hanyang University, South Korea,
5 Hitachi Astemo, Japan, 6 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
msomeki@andrew.cmu.edu
Abstract
Recent speech research involves increasingly large datasets, com-
plex models, and diverse experimental workflows. However,
existing frameworks require substantial engineering effort to
support such experiments. We present ESPnet3, a speech and
audio research framework built on a modular system architec-
ture with configuration-driven dataset composition and unified
Python-based workflows. ESPnet3 introduces a DataOrganizer
abstraction for flexible dataset integration and dataset sharding
for memory-efficient large-scale training, while allowing recipe-
specific logic through lightweight stage overrides. In OWSM
pre-training experiments, ESPnet3 reduces per-epoch training
time by21.1 minutescompared to ESPnet2 and achieves>80%
GPU utilizationin multi-node training. Fine-tuning experiments
show that new models and datasets can be integrated with around
46 lines of additional code. ESPnet3 will be publicly released
with model checkpoints and training logs.
Index Terms: speech recognition, open-source toolkit, human-
computer interaction, computational paralinguistics
1. Introduction
Speech and audio research has entered the foundation-model era.
Training corpora have expanded from thousands to millions of
hours [1–7], while model sizes have grown to billions of param-
eters [8–15]. Large-scale training now enables unified models
that cover diverse languages, accents, and tasks within a single
architecture [2,16,17]. At the same time, research is increasingly
focused on systems that combine multiple pretrained models,
external tools, and multi-task pipelines [18–25]. This transition
has fundamentally changed not only model capacity, but also the
requirements placed on research infrastructure.
Modern deep-learning-based toolkits such as ESPnet [26],
Fairseq [27], and HuggingFace Transformers [28] have signifi-
cantly lowered the entry barrier for speech research. However,
as experiments scale to multi-million-hour corpora and billion-
parameter models, system-level challenges emerge that extend
beyond model implementation. These include composing multi-
ple datasets, efficient dataset iteration, distributed training across
GPUs and nodes, and integrating large pretrained models with
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods.
ESPnet and its underlying framework ESPnet2 have played
a central role in the open-source speech community by providing
*Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
unified implementations across a wide range of tasks. How-
ever, its architecture tightly couples the experiment logic with
the core components, which makes new experimental configu-
rations costly to implement. For example, adding LoRA [29]
support for Whisper [1] required modifications across more than
20 files and 670 lines of code in ESPnet2 1. ESPnet-EZ [30]
was introduced to address some of these usability concerns by
enabling Python-only interaction and simplifying fine-tuning
workflows. However, it was not designed for large-scale train-
ing from scratch and lacks abstractions for data handling or
distributed training.
To address these challenges, we proposeESPnet3, a re-
designed speech and audio research framework that builds upon
ESPnet2’s role in enabling large-scale research while reducing
the recipe-level engineering effort required for exploratory ex-
perimentation. ESPnet3 adopts a modular system architecture
in which the common stages of the research workflow are cen-
tralized within the framework, while experiment-specific logic
remains in lightweight recipes. This separation reduces cou-
pling between experiments and the internals of the framework
while maintaining compatibility with ESPnet models such as
Conformer [31] and E-Branchformer [32].
We evaluate ESPnet3 using large-scale OWSM [7] pre-
training and fine-tuning experiments. In pre-training experi-
ments, ESPnet3 reduces per-epoch training time by 21.1 minutes
(22.2% relative) compared to ESPnet2 while achieving stable
multi-node GPU utilization above 80%. Fine-tuning experiments
further show that new models and datasets can be integrated with
minimal additional code.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• Configuration-driven data abstraction:A Hydra [33]-based
DataOrganizer that enables modular dataset composition
and shard-based iteration for scalable training.
• Modular system architecture:A modular design that sep-
arates experiment logic from core infrastructure, reducing
architectural coupling, and improving extensibility.
• End-to-end workflow:A unified framework that connects
data processing, training, evaluation, inference, and publica-
tion, integrating evaluation platforms such as VERSA [34].
• Scalable experimentation support:Support for large-scale
pre-training and third-party PEFT libraries within a unified
workflow, enabling new models and datasets to be incorpo-
1Including CI and test scripts, the PR #5400 modified 26 files and
899 lines.
4767
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2698
Table 1:Task and feature coverage across speech process-
ing frameworks. ESPnet3 inherits task coverage from ESP-
net2 while introducing new infrastructure for scalable exper-
imentation. Frameworks: E2=ESPnet2, E3=ESPnet3, Nemo,
SB=SpeechBrain, NGK=Next-gen Kaldi, ST=Speech Transla-
tion, SLU=Spoken Language Understanding. ✓ = supported, ✗
= not supported.
E2 E3 (Ours) NeMo SB NGK
Speech and Audio Modeling Tasks
ASR✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
ST✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
SLU✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
TTS✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
V oice Conversion✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Singing V oice Synth.✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Speech Enhancement✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Speaker Recognition✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Self-supervised Learning✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Speech-language Models✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Audio Classification✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Neural Speech Codec✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
Infrastructure
Multi-node Training✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
HF Datasets Integration✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Dataset Sharding✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
Pure Python Workflow✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
rated with minimal additional code.
2. Related Works
Several open-source toolkits [30, 35] have been developed for
end-to-end speech and audio processing, each emphasizing dif-
ferent design priorities and user communities. These toolkits
differ in both task coverage and infrastructure design, as summa-
rized in Table 1. ESPnet [26] supports a broad range of speech
modeling tasks, while other frameworks prioritize different sub-
sets of these capabilities. With respect to scalability, modern
frameworks increasingly support distributed training and large
pretrained models. NeMo [36] explicitly targets large-scale and
multi-node training scenarios, while SpeechBrain [37, 38] and
other PyTorch-based frameworks rely on native distributed back-
ends. ESPnet3 builds on the ESPnet ecosystem and focuses
on restructuring the underlying research infrastructure to better
support large-scale experimentation. Specifically, ESPnet3 intro-
duces configuration-driven dataset composition, dataset sharding
for memory-efficient training, and a modular pythonic workflow
that separates experiment logic from core framework compo-
nents.
By adopting Hydra-based configuration and PyTorch Light-
ning–based training, ESPnet3 aligns ESPnet workflows with
widely used modern deep-learning infrastructure while remain-
ing compatible with existing ESPnet2-based recipes. Together,
these dependencies improve long-term maintainability and al-
low ESPnet3 to support large datasets, distributed training, and
parameter-efficient fine-tuning within a unified workflow.
3. Design
ESPnet3 is designed around three architectural principles:
configuration-driven data abstraction for declarative dataset com-
position and scalable iteration, modular system architecture that
separates experiment logic from framework internals, and a uni-
1. Dataset
Prep.
2. Dataset
Mixing
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400# of lines
338
188
V2 V2
279
24
V3 V3
shell
python
yaml
1. Dataset
Prep.
2. Dataset
Mixing
0
1
2
3
4
5# of files
3
4
V2 V2
1
2
V3 V3
shell
python
yaml
Figure 1:Comparison of implementation effort between ESPnet2
(V2) and ESPnet3 (V3) for dataset management. (a) ESPnet3
significantly reduces the lines of code to prepare and mix the
datasets for large scale training. (b) The number of files required
to edit is also minimized.
ESPnet2 ESPnet3
0
10000
20000
30000
40000RAM Usage (MB)
35.9 GB
73.1 MB
ESPnet2
ESPnet3
ESPnet2 ESPnet3
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350Dataset Update Time (s)
311.5 s
13.1 s
ESPnet2
ESPnet3
Figure 2:Memory overhead (left) and dataset refresh time (right)
in our OWSM pre-training experiments: ESPnet2 without dataset
sharding vs. ESPnet3 with sharding. (64 shards, 16 GPUs).
fied end-to-end workflow that connects data processing, training,
inference, and evaluation.
3.1. Data Organizer
Large-scale speech projects often require integrating dozens of
heterogeneous corpora, each with distinct formats and prepro-
cessing pipelines. In ESPnet2-based workflows, such integration
frequently relied on recipe-level scripting and format conversion,
leading to extensive glue code when datasets were added, mixed,
or augmented. These challenges became particularly evident
in large-scale projects such as OWSM [7] and Bagpiper [15],
which motivated a structural redesign of data handling within
the ESPnet framework. ESPnet3 introduces DataOrganizer,
a configuration-driven abstraction that treats datasets as modu-
lar components. Datasets are declaratively composed through
Hydra-based Y AML configuration:
d a t a s e t :
_ t a r g e t _ : D a t a O r g a n i z e r
t r a i n :
− d a t a s e t : L i b r i s p e e c h
− d a t a s e t : S w i t c h b o a r d
4768
espnet
egs3
corpus folder
run.py
conf
train 100m owsm.yaml
src
data augmentation.py
owsm data
create dataset.py
owsm dataset.py
<other dataset definitions>
(21 lines)
(260 lines)
(231 lines)
(106 lines)
(58 lines)
(697 lines)
Figure 3:Typical directory structure of an ESPnet3 training
recipe, illustrated using the OWSM pretraining setup. Numbers
in parentheses indicate lines of code.
Additional datasets can be enabled or disabled by editing the
configuration, without modifying pipeline code. Each dataset
is implemented as a standard PyTorch Dataset returning a
dictionary of fields, and the DataOrganizer unifies them
into a single iterable object while preserving dataset-specific
logic. Figure 1 quantifies the resulting reduction in engineering
effort. Compared to ESPnet2, ESPnet3 significantly reduces
both lines of code and the number of files required for dataset
preparation and mixing.
3.2. Dataset Sharding
Full-split dataset iteration becomes inefficient at the million-
hour scale due to repeated initialization and memory overhead.
ESPnet3 addresses this through shard-level iteration. Let S
denote the number of shards and R the number of distributed
workers. At epoche, workerrprocesses shard
s(e, r) = (eR+r) modS.(1)
This rank-aware shard rotation ensures balanced coverage with-
out reloading the full dataset at epoch boundaries.
As shown in Figure 2, shard-based iteration significantly re-
duces dataset initialization overhead in our OWSM pre-training
experiments (64 shards, 16 GPUs). For ESPnet2, we report the
total size of dataset metadata, which must be loaded on RAM
during DataLoader construction, while for ESPnet3 we report the
measured increase in CPU RAM during shard-level DataLoader
initialization. ESPnet2 requires materializing 36 GB dataset
metadata, whereas ESPnet3 leverages lazy loading via Hugging-
Face Datasets and requires only 73 MB of additional CPU RAM
usage on average. Dataset refresh time is also reduced from
311.5 s to 13.1 s due to the reduced memory overhead.
3.3. Recipe Overview
Figure 3 illustrates a typical directory structure of an ESPnet3
training recipe using the OWSM pretraining setup. In ESPnet3,
run.py serves as the entry point of the workflow, loading ex-
periment configurations defined in YAML and executing the
corresponding stages. In ESPnet2, execution stages were de-
fined within task-specific shell scripts, and their definitions often
differed across recipes. This led to duplicated logic and incon-
sistencies across tasks, since improvements to training pipelines
or evaluation procedures had to be manually propagated to each
recipe. ESPnet3 addresses this issue by centralizing common
python run.py
  --stages train infer
  --train_config ...
  --infer_config ...
BaseSystem
train()
infer()
train_tokenizer()
System classRecipe Stages
Custom
System
extends
...
Figure 4:Execution architecture of ESPnet3. The run.py
entry point loads experiment configurations and initializes the
System class, which implements workflow stages such as train-
ing and inference. Recipe-specific functionality can be intro-
duced by overriding BaseSystem and adding stage functions.
workflow stages within the core framework through a shared
BaseSystem abstraction. The BaseSystem class serves as
a centralized orchestration layer that manages common work-
flow stages, including data preparation, training, inference, and
model packaging, as well as optional evaluation/measurement
stages when configured. As shown in Figure 4, the system
provides standard stages such as train() and infer(), en-
suring that updates to training logic automatically apply across
tasks. Recipe-specific functionality can be introduced by extend-
ing BaseSystem and implementing additional stage functions.
Instead of large shell and Perl orchestration scripts used in ES-
Pnet2, ESPnet3 recipes consist of a lightweight Python entry
point, configuration files, and modular source components. As
a result, the OWSM training recipe shrinks from 2,289 lines
of orchestration code in ESPnet2 to just 70 lines in ESPnet3
(Table 2).
4. Experiments
This section evaluates ESPnet3 from a system perspective, fo-
cusing on implementation simplicity and extensibility rather
than raw model performance. We use OWSM V4 pre-training
and fine-tuning as representative case studies to demonstrate
how ESPnet3 supports multiple dimensions of scaling, including
large-scale dataset integration and diverse fine-tuning strategies.
4.1. OWSM Pre-training
Setup.We conducted pre-training of the OWSM-V4 base
model [7] (102 M parameters) to evaluate both the implemen-
tation simplicity and the effectiveness of dataset scaling in ES-
Pnet3. This experiment leverages the DataOrganizer and
sharding mechanisms described in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. The
model was trained on approximately 320 k hours of speech
data. To further demonstrate the flexibility of ESPnet3’s data
pipeline, we applied on-the-fly data augmentation during train-
ing following [9], which can be seamlessly integrated via the
DataOrganizer without modifying the training pipeline.
Notably, this pre-training was carried out using the default
BaseSystem provided by ESPnet3 (Section 3.3), without in-
troducing any OWSM-specific system implementations or modi-
fying the core framework. Word error rate (WER) was evaluated
on the CHiME-4 [39] real test set.
Results.All reported timing results in this section are averaged
over logs from five consecutive training epochs. As shown in
Figure 5, OWSM pre-training on ESPnet3 achieves stable GPU
utilization exceeding 80% on a 4-node, 16-GPU setup (4 H100
4769
Figure 5:GPU utilization for 4-node (16 GPUs, accumulation =
1) training. We achieved over 80% scaling efficiency even across
nodes (Slingshot interconnect).
Table 2:Comparison of training efficiency and implementa-
tion complexity between ESPnet2 and ESPnet3 for OWSM-Base
pre-training. Both experiments were conducted with the same
hardware and training configurations.Upddenotes the average
wall-clock time per optimizer update (seconds), and the results
are averaged over 5 epochs.Config,Dataset, andRecipeindi-
cate the number of lines of code.
Framework Upd (s) Epoch (min) Config Dataset Recipe
ESPnet2 0.594 95.3 147 1230 2289
ESPnet3 0.441 74.2 268 1723 70
per node). Table 2 compares the training efficiency between
ESPnet2 and ESPnet3 for OWSM-Base pre-training. Compared
to the ESPnet2 baseline 2, ESPnet3 reduces the average epoch
time from 95.3 minutes to 74.2 minutes, and the per-update
processing time from 0.594 seconds to 0.441 seconds.
Furthermore, ESPnet3 reduces the overhead of large-scale
dataset iteration. In ESPnet2, handling large datasets often re-
quires periodically reconstructing the data iterator to avoid exces-
sive memory usage. In contrast, ESPnet3 uses dataset sharding
(Section 3.2), which reduces RAM usage from around 35.9GB to
73.1MB and dataset refresh time from 311.5s to 13.1s, as shown
in Figure 2.
Table 3 shows that enabling augmentation through the
DataOrganizer pipeline leads to an improvement in WER,
confirming that standard training workflows can be seamlessly
integrated.
4.2. Fine-tuning Results
Setup.We also conducted fine-tuning experiments with Whis-
per Large v3 (WhisperLv3) [1] to demonstrate that ESPnet3
supports large-scale custom model training, even for models that
are not natively part of the ESPnet framework. More specifically,
we fine-tuned the WhisperLv3 on FalAR [40], a large-scale Euro-
pean Portuguese (EP) parliamentary speech dataset derived from
the Portuguese National Assembly, which includes 5k hours of
speaker-annotated data recorded over a span of 20 years. For
the FalAR setup, we evaluated the fine-tuned models on the
CAMÕES benchmark, a multi-domain collection of 14 datasets,
spanning a diverse set of speakers, with ages ranging from 3-to-
100 years, designed to benchmark modern EP ASR systems [41].
To further demonstrate the ease of model customization, we also
2espnet/owsm_v4_base_102M
Table 3:Effect of data augmentation in OWSM-Base pre-training.
WER is evaluated on the CHiME-4 test set at the same training
budget (350k updates).
Setting WER (%)∆WER
ESPnet3 (plain) 12.84 –
ESPnet3 (+ augmentation) 12.53 -0.31
Table 4:WER (%) comparison of Whisper Large v3 (Whis-
perLv3): zero-shot results on CAMÕES benchmark and fine-
tuned results after training both models on FalAR dataset using
ESPnet3. (OWSM results will be added in the future release)
model WER (%) #lines #files
WhisperLv3 22.65 - -
Finetuned on FalAR
WhisperLv3 full finetune 19.42 212 5
+ Lora (PEFT) 19.47 297 5
performed PEFT using LoRA via the HuggingFace PEFT pack-
age. For inference with all models, we use a beam size of 1 and
apply a Portuguese-specific normalizer derived from Whisper’s
base normalizer.
Results.As shown in Table 4, ESPnet3 enables fine-tuning
for models that are not originally supported by ESPnet, such as
Whisper. Furthermore, integrating a new Hugging Face dataset
requires only 46 lines of code in ESPnet3. For comparison,
implementing the same functionality in ESPnet2 required 374
lines of code in our manual implementation, corresponding to an
87.7% relative reduction. These experiments show the potential
of ESPnet3 in delivering state-of-the-art models, trained with
large-scale data, with minimal additional code.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we present ESPnet3, a redesigned speech and audio
research framework that addresses system-level bottlenecks that
emerge in large-scale speech modeling. As speech and audio
research scales in data, model, language, and research styles, en-
gineering overhead has become a critical constraint on research
productivity. ESPnet3 adopts a modular and configuration-driven
design that separates system logic, data organization, and exper-
imental recipes. As a result, ESPnet3 significantly reduces the
required development in the recipe-level code size compared to
ESPnet2. In large-scale OWSM pre-training, ESPnet3 shows
a reduction of the average per-epoch training time by approxi-
mately 21.1 minutes, showing efficiency in multi-node training.
Experiments on fine-tuning the Whisper model demonstrate that
ESPnet3 enables seamless integration of external and custom
models, supporting diverse training and fine-tuning strategies
within a unified, scalable workflow. By lowering the entry barrier
to speech and audio modality development, we expect ESPnet3
to encourage researchers to explore multimodal systems that
integrate with other modalities.
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools have been used to help revise and refine the
manuscript. Authors take full responsibility for the content.
4770
7. Acknowledgements
Experiments of this work used the Bridges2 system at PSC
and Delta and DeltaAI system at NCSA through allocations
CIS210014 and IRI120008P from the Advanced Cyberinfrastruc-
ture Coordination Ecosystem: Services & Support (ACCESS)
program, supported by National Science Foundation grants
#2138259,#:2138286, #:2138307, #:2137603, and #:2138296.
The work was also partially supported by Ministry of Edu-
cation, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic (MoE) through
the OP JAK project "Linguistics, Artificial Intelligence and Lan-
guage and Speech Technologies: from Research to Applications"
(ID:CZ.02.01.01/00/23_020/0008518).