ARTT: Augmented Reverberant-Target Training for Unsupervised Monaural
Speech Dereverberation
Siqi Song, Fulin Wu, Zhong-Qiu Wang ID ∗∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
siqi.song1@outlook.com, wang.zhongqiu41@gmail.com
Abstract
Due to the absence of clean reference signals and spatial cues,
monaural unsupervised speech dereverberation is a challenging
ill-posed inverse problem. To realize it, we propose augmented
reverberant-target training (ARTT), which consists of two stages.
In the first stage, reverberant-target training (RTT) is proposed
to first further reverberate the observed reverberant mixture sig-
nal, and then train a deep neural network (DNN) to recover the
observed reverberant mixture via discriminative training. Al-
though the target signal to fit is reverberant, we find that the
resulting DNN can effectively reduce reverberation. In the sec-
ond stage, an online self-distillation mechanism based on the
mean-teacher algorithm is proposed to further improve derever-
beration. Evaluation results demonstrate that ARTT achieves
strong unsupervised dereverberation performance, significantly
outperforming previous baselines.
Index Terms: Unsupervised speech dereverberation
1. Introduction
Room reverberation is a ubiquitous phenomenon in real-world
acoustic environments [1–3]. While natural to human ears, it
severely degrades speech intelligibility and impairs downstream
applications such as automatic speech recognition and speaker
recognition [4, 5]. Although multi-microphone systems can ex-
ploit spatial diversity to mitigate these effects, monaural blind
dereverberation remains a fundamentally ill-posed inverse prob-
lem [6]. It requires decoupling the anechoic speech and room
impulse response (RIR) based on only a single-channel noisy-
reverberant mixture signal, without access to reference signals
for model training or spatial cues for suppressing reverberation.
Supervised deep learning effectively trains deep neural net-
works (DNNs) to estimate anechoic targets based on reverberant
inputs [7–14]. However, a fundamental constraint is the require-
ment of pairs of reverberant mixture signals and their correspond-
ing anechoic speech for supervised training. Since acquiring the
clean anechoic signals of real-recorded reverberant mixtures is
often difficult, models are typically trained on synthetic datasets
created by using a room simulator [15, 16]. This, however, often
leads to a domain mismatch problem between model training
and testing, causing performance degradation when the trained
models are applied to unseen acoustic environments [5, 17].
To overcome this, early unsupervised approaches, such as
weighted prediction error (WPE) [4, 18, 19], employ delayed
linear prediction to estimate late reverberation, which is then
subtracted from the mixture for dereverberation. While WPE
**indicates the corresponding author.
This research was supported by National Key Research and Devel-
opment Program of China (Grant No. 2025YFF0518003).
is computationally efficient and effective for suppressing late
reverberation, it does not fully exploit the rich speech priors and
room acoustics that data-driven approaches can leverage.
Neural methods like USDnet [6, 20] and CTRnet [21] in-
corporate physical consistency by optimizing mixture-constraint
losses. This mechanism trains DNNs solely on a training set of
reverberant mixtures by constraining that the DNN-estimated
clean speech, if linearly filtered in a proper way, should recon-
struct the observed reverberant mixture. To obtain the filters,
forward convolutive prediction [22, 23] is used to estimate the
linear filters that best align the network output with the mixture.
However, while USDnet enforces physical constraints, it typi-
cally requires multi-channel mixture-constraint losses to ensure
sufficiently robust constraints and accurate dereverb. Recent
generative methods such as BUDDy [24] and USD-DPS [25]
extend the diffusion framework to handle unknown RIRs. By
including a parametric RIR model, they perform joint room
acoustics estimation and dereverberation along reverse diffusion
trajectory. Despite their generalization ability, iterative joint
estimation incurs a heavy computational burden.
There are alternative unsupervised methods bypassing filter
computation entirely [26, 27]. The noisy-target training (NyTT)
framework [28], based on the Noise2Noise principle [29], first
adds noises to each observed noisy mixture and then trains a
DNN, in a discriminative fashion, to reconstruct the original
noisy mixture based on the newly-created noisy mixture. Since
the DNN cannot predict random independent noise, optimizing
the reconstruction loss encourages the model to learn the shared
underlying speech patterns and realize denoising. However, stan-
dard NyTT fundamentally struggles with speech dereverberation,
as room reverberation is a highly-correlated convolutional pro-
cess, which violates the independent noise assumption.
In this context, we propose augmented reverberant-target
training (ARTT), an unsupervised approach for monaural unsu-
pervised speech dereverberation. Inspired by NyTT [30], we
propose reverberant-target training (RTT), where each observed
reverberant mixture signal is first convolved with a stochastic
synthetic impulse response to add more reverberation, and then
a DNN is trained in a discriminative way to recover the observed
reverberant signal based on the newly-created mixture. Although
effective, RTT is found not stable and has limited performance.
To address these issues, inspired by a teacher-student learning
algorithm named BYOL [31] we propose to augment RTT with a
continuous online self-distillation mechanism, which utilizes an
exponential moving average (EMA) teacher to dynamically gen-
erate consistent targets for teacher-student learning. In addition,
by corrupting the student’s input with both synthetic reverbera-
tion and noise, we achieve dereverberation and denoising within
a unified, stable loop. Evaluation results demonstrate that ARTT
outperforms existing monaural unsupervised methods.
7085
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1857
Student Net
Teacher Net
Student Net
EMA
STAGE II: Self-DistillationSTAGE I: Reverberant-Target Training
Figure 1:ARTT overview.
2. ARTT
ARTT deals with monaural speech dereverberation. Letx denote
direct-path signal,h the corresponding, unknown relative trans-
fer function (RTF) relating the direct-path signal to reverberant
speech, andv the additive background noise, the observed mix-
ture signalycan be formulated, in the time domain, as follows:
y=x∗h+v,(1)
where∗ denotes linear convolution. In unsupervised speech
dereverberation, we assume that we only have access to a dataset
D={y i}N
i=1 consisting of N observed reverberant mixture
signals, and the clean source x and RTFh are both inaccessi-
ble. Our goal is to train an unsupervised DNN model Fθ that
can estimate the direct-path signal, ˆx=Fθ(y), solely relying
onD. The proposed ARTT approach consists of two stages,
reverberant-target training and self-distillation, both of which
are described next. See Fig. 1 for an overview.
2.1. Stage I: Reverberant-Target Training
To deal with the fact that clean target speech is not available for
model training in an unsupervised setup, we propose reverberant-
target training (RTT) to enable discriminative training and realize
initial unsupervised dereverberation. The idea is to train a su-
pervised, discriminative DNN model to reconstruct the observed
reverberant mixture signal y from a further reverberated mix-
turez=y∗h syn, where hsyn is a synthetic statistical RTF to
be described later in Eq. (2). Since the input z isx∗h∗h syn
and due to the commutative property of linear convolution, the
model would not be able to learn to surgically removehsyn while
maintainingh. Intuitively, it would tend to learn to reduce both
hsyn andh, thereby to some extent realizing dereverberation.
Following a stochastic reverberation model [32], the syn-
thetic statistical RTFhsyn is designed to have a unit impulse at
the first sample followed by an exponentially decaying diffuse
tail, as shown in Fig. 2. In detail, it is modeled as:
hsyn[n] =



1,forn= 0;
γ·η[n]·e −λ·n,forn>0;
0,otherwise,
(2)
whereη[n]∼N(0,1) is sampled from Gaussian white noise,λ
determines the decay rate corresponding to a randomly sampled
reverberation time (T60), andγ is a scaling factor controlling the
energy of late reverberation relative to that of the first sample.
The DNN model takes as input the reverberated mixture
z=y∗h syn, and is trained to reconstruct the original observed
mixture signaly via supervised training using the following loss:
LRTT =L rec
 
Fθ(y∗h syn),y

,(3)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Time (s)
0.0
0.5
1.0Amplitude
Figure 2:Example synthetic statistical RTFh syn for RTT.
whereLrec(·,·) is a distance function to be described later in
Eq. (9). In this stage, RTT enables the model to learn how to
suppress the synthetic late reverberation, providing an initial
dereverberation result for subsequent self-distillation.
2.2. Stage II: Self-Distillation
Although in our experiments RTT is effective at dereverberation,
we also observe that it has limited performance at isolating
direct-path signal, and in addition the network risks overfitting
to the observed mixture y. To improve the performance, we
adapt the mean-teacher framework [33] to the task of speech
dereverberation, where the teacher network’s parametersθ′ are
updated via an EMA of the student network’s parameters. In
detail, the teacher parametersθ′ are updated iteratively from the
student parametersθat training stepkusing the EMA strategy:
θ′
k =α·θ ′
k−1 + (1−α)·θ k,(4)
whereα∈[0,1) is a momentum factor controlling the update
smoothness. In essence, the teacher network serves as a temporal
ensemble of the student, and could provide coherent and stable
pseudo-labels for improving the student. Specifically, we design
an asymmetric training strategy where the student and teacher
process differently-corrupted signals that naturally drives the
model to suppress reverberation.
1) Augmented Input Construction: First, a physically-
simulated RTF hrel, which is acoustically more realistic than
hsyn in Eq. (2), is created to refine the initial mapping learned in
Stage I. It is computed by first using a room simulator to generate
a full reverberant RIR hsim and the corresponding direct-path
componenth dir, and then using the following method:
hrel =iFFT
 FFT(hsim)
FFT(hdir)

,(5)
where FFT and iFFT respectively denote the fast Fourier trans-
form and its inverse. Note thathrel serves as a correction filter
that maps the direct sound to the reverberant observation in the
simulator’s acoustic space. To force the network to learn a noise-
invariant representation and implicitly denoise the observation
y, we further inject independent Gaussian noisesϵT∼N(0,σ 2
T)
andϵS∼N(0,σ 2
S ), where the subscripts “T” and “S” respec-
tively mean teacher and student. This results in two distinct
inputs:
7086
• Teacher Input (Stable): ˜y=y+ϵ T, which serves as the
pseudo-target generator.
• Student Input (Hard): ˜z=y∗h rel +ϵ S, which contains both
synthetic reverberation and noise perturbation.
This construction creates anasymmetriclearning task. The
teacher network receives a cleaner input (i.e., ˜y) to maintain
reliable guidance, while the student network is exposed to a
heavily corrupted input (i.e., ˜z) augmented with both the relative
reverberation and additive noise. This forces the student network
to implicitly invert the RTFhrel and denoise the signal to match
the teacher network’s canonical representation.
2) Distillation Objectives: The goal is to align the student’s
predictionFθ(˜z)with the teacher’s stable target ˆyT =F θ′ (˜y).
The primary self-distillation loss enforces invariance against the
synthetic reverberation and noise:
Ldistill =L rec
 
Fθ(˜z),SG(ˆyT)

,(6)
where SG(·) stands for the stop-gradient operator. To avoid con-
vergence to trivial solutions, we introduce an auxiliary regular-
ization term that utilizes the original observationy as a reference
constraint:
Laux =L rec
 
Fθ(˜z),y

.(7)
The overall objective combines the above two loss functions
using a weighting termω(>0):
LStageII =L distill +ω·L aux.(8)
2.3. Loss Function
We employ a unified reconstruction loss function Lrec(ˆu,u)
across both training stages, withu denoting the reference target
signal (specifically,y in Stage I and ˆyT in Stage II) and ˆuthe
estimated signal. It combines time- and time-frequency-domain
losses:
Lrec(ˆu,u) =LSI−SDR−SE(ˆu,u) +LMag(ˆu,u),(9)
which are respectively defined as follows:
LSI-SDR-SE =−10·log 10
∥u∥2
2
∥ ˆβ·ˆu−u∥ 2
2
,with ˆβ= ˆuTu
ˆuT ˆu
(10)
LMag = 1
T×F
STFT(ˆu)
−
STFT(u)

1.(11)
3. Experimental Setup
3.1. Dataset and Evaluation Metrics
We validate the proposed algorithms based on the WSJ0CAM-
DEREVERB dataset, a popular benchmark widely used in dere-
verberation studies [6, 23, 25]. The dry source signals are from
the WSJ0CAM corpus, which has 7,861 , 742 and 1,088 ut-
terances in its training, validation and test sets, respectively.
Based on them, 39,293 (∼77.7 h), 2,968 (∼5.6 h) and 3,262
(∼6.4 h) noisy-reverberant mixtures are respectively simulated
as the training, validation and test sets. An 8-channel circular
microphone array (with a diameter of 20 cm) records speech
at distances between 0.75 and 2.5 m, with reverberation times
(T60) between 0.2 and 1.3 s. Diffuse air-conditioning noise from
the REVERB dataset [5] is added at randomly-chosen SNRs
from 5 to 25 dB. The sampling rate is 16 kHz. We only use the
first channel of the dataset for training and testing.
We use the direct-path signal at the first channel as the
reference signal for metric computation. We report perceptual
evaluation of speech quality (PESQ) [34] scores to measure
perceptual quality, extended short-time objective intelligibility
(eSTOI) [35] to evaluate speech intelligibility, and SI-SDR [36]
to evaluate the accuracy of dereverberated signals at the sample
level. We use the python-pesq toolkit to compute narrow-
band PESQ, and thepystoitoolkit to compute eSTOI.
3.2. Method Configuration
For RTT, to prevent overfitting and ensure robustness, we imple-
ment it by generating synthetic RIRshsyn online during training.
The reverberation time (T60) is sampled from a uniform dis-
tributionU(0.5,1.2) s, while the direct-to-reverberant energy
ratio (DRR) is drawn fromU(−16,−6) dB. The stochastic dif-
fuse tail is generated via Gaussian white noise modulated by
an exponentially-decaying envelope, with the scaling factor γ
dynamically computed to ensure its energy relative to the unit
direct-path matches the sampled DRR.
For self-distillation, the pyroomacoustics toolkit [16]
is employed to simulate physically-consistent environments us-
ing the image method. Room dimensions are uniformly sampled
with length and width from the range [5.0,10.0] m, and height
from [3.0,4.0] m. TheT60 ranges from 0.2 to 1.3 s. The relative
RIRhrel is derived via spectral deconvolution using Eq. (5). The
weighting term in Eq. (8) for the auxiliary loss is set to ω= 1.2 .
The noise standard deviationsσT andσS are set to 0.02 times the
standard deviation of the observationy. The momentum factor
αis set to0.999.
We use TF-GridNet [12] as our DNN architecture. We
set its hyper-parameters to D= 128,B= 4,I= 1,J=
1,H= 200,L= 3 and E= 4 . It is trained via complex
spectral mapping [9, 37–39] to predict the real and imaginary
(RI) components of the target signals from the RI components
of the input mixtures. For STFT, the window size is 32 ms, hop
size 8 ms, and the square root of the Hann window is used as the
analysis window.
3.3. Baselines
We compare our method with unsupervised baselines including
WPE [18], USDnet [6] and BUDDy [24], as well as a supervised
baseline, DNN-WPE [40]. For WPE, we use the implementation
in the nara-wpe toolkit [41], and the STFT configuration is
consistent with our experiment. The filter tap length is set to 37,
the prediction delay to 3, and the algorithm is run for 3 iterations.
For USDnet, we report their best results in row 2a in Table II
and 3a in Table VIII of the original paper [6]. For BUDDy,
we report the results of their best setup. It is based on the 1D
U-Net variant, which outperforms the original NCSN++ version
in Table 1 of [25]. For DNN-WPE [40], we use the same DNN
in our framework, and the STFT configuration follows the WPE
baseline.
4. Evaluation Results
Table 1 reports the results on the test set of WSJ0CAM-
DEREVERB. The unprocessed mixture suffers from severe rever-
beration, resulting in a low SI-SDR of−3.6 dB. While traditional
WPE and single-channel USDnet show limited improvements,
the recent generative method BUDDy achieves a competitive
SI-SDR of 2.1 dB. In contrast, our proposed ARTTStageI model
achieves an SI-SDR of 3.3 dB, surpassing all unsupervised base-
lines and demonstrating the effectiveness of RTT. Introducing
Stage II provides a significant performance boost, further elevat-
ing the performance to state-of-the-art levels, reaching 7.3 dB
7087
Table 1:Results on test set of WSJ0CAM-DEREVERB.
Row System Unsupervised Number of Channels in SI-SDR (dB)↑PESQ↑eSTOI↑
Input Loss
0a Mixture -1-−3.6 1.64 0.494
1a WPE [18]✓1-−1.7 1.78 0.529
1b WPE [18]✓8-1.3 2.02 0.690
2a USDnet [6]✓1 1−2.1 1.76 0.561
2b USDnet [6]✓1 8 2.9 2.53 0.772
2c BUDDy [24]✓1-2.1 2.49 0.802
3a DNN-WPE [40]✗1-2.8 2.16 0.744
4a ARTT StageI (RTT)✓1-3.3 2.18 0.740
4b ARTT StageII (RTT+Self-Distillation)✓1-7.3 2.61 0.832
Table 2:Ablation results of ARTT StageII on WSJ0CAM-DEREVERB.
Inject Noise (ϵ)L aux SI-SDR (dB)↑PESQ↑eSTOI↑
✓ ✗3.1 1.97 0.727
✗ ✓6.0 2.52 0.820
✓ ✓7.3 2.61 0.832
0
2
4
6
8Frequency (kHz)
Mixture
 Clean
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Time (s)
0
2
4
6
8Frequency (kHz)
ARTTStageI
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Time (s)
ARTTStageII
Figure 3:Spectrogram visualization of reverberant mixture, clean refer-
ence signals (direct-path), and outputs of ARTT StageI and ARTTStageII.
in SI-SDR and 2.61 in PESQ. We then compare our framework
with the supervised baseline, DNN-WPE in row 3a. Our unsu-
pervised framework significantly outperforms it in all metrics.
Table 2 validates the contribution of each component in
Stage II of ARTT. Removing the auxiliary loss leads to a sharp
degradation across all metrics. This confirms that, without the
regularization from the reference signal, the self-distillation pro-
cess becomes unstable and prone to model collapse. Excluding
the noise injection ϵ also results in a noticeable decline, par-
ticularly in SI-SDR. This indicates that the independent noise
perturbation effectively guides the model to suppress the back-
ground interference present in the mixtures.
Figure 4 evaluates the robustness of ARTT by comparing
Stage I and II at different input SNR levels on the test set
of WSJ0CAM-DEREVERB. With self-distillation, ARTTStageII
demonstrates significantly higher stability, maintaining relatively
stable performance at all the input SNR levels, while ARTTStageI
degrades rapidly in low input SNR ranges. This confirms that
the self-distillation process effectively rectifies the instability of
the initial dereverberation by RTT in noisy environments.
In Figure 3, we show example outputs from the two stages of
ARTT on a test mixture sampled from WSJ0CAM-DEREVERB.
We observe that ARTTStageI effectively suppresses late reverbera-
tion, significantly reducing the smearing effects observed in the
−10
0
10
SI-SDR (dB)
[-16, -14][-14, -12][-12, -10][-10, -8][-8, -6][-6, -4][-4, -2][-2, 0][0, 2][2, 4][4, 6][6, 8][8, 10][10, 12][12, 14]
Input SNR (dB)
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0PESQ
Unprocessed ARTTStageI ARTTStageII
Figure 4:SI-SDR (dB) and PESQ comparison between ARTT StageI and
ARTTStageII at different ranges of input SNR levels. Best viewed in color .
mixture. However, the output appears slightly over-smoothed,
with a loss of fine spectral textures. In comparison, ARTTStageII
better preserves the fine spectral structures and better reduces the
background noise, exhibiting sharper harmonic structures and
clearer formants that closely match the clean reference signal.
A sound demo is provided in the link below1.
5. Conclusion
We have proposed ARTT, an unsupervised training framework
for monaural blind dereverberation. RTT effectively addresses
the challenge of missing clean references by constructing su-
pervision signals directly from reverberant observations. In
addition, the introduction of an online self-distillation stage ex-
ploiting asymmetric acoustic inputs significantly enhances the
model’s robustness against noise and artifacts. Evaluation results
on the WSJ0CAM-DEREVERB dataset demonstrate that ARTT
outperforms existing unsupervised baselines.
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI was used only for language polishing. All scien-
tific content and results were produced by the authors, who take
full responsibility for the paper.
1Seehttps://arttdemo.github.io/artt_demo/.
7088