Segment-wise Embedding based Graph Attention Network for Effective
Speech Emotion Recognition
Haoyu Song1,∗∗, Ian McLoughlin1, Yan Song2, Lirong Dai2
1 Singapore Institute of Technology, Singapore
2 University of Science and Technology of China, China
2303822@sit.singaporetech.edu.sg, ian.mcloughlin@singaporetech.edu.sg,
songy@ustc.edu.cn, lrdai@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
With the advancement of pretrained speech models like Hubert-
large, leveraging general representations for downstream tasks
such as speech emotion recognition (SER) is of growing im-
portance to both academia and industry. We propose a highly
effective segment-wise embedding-domain graph-attention net-
work (GAT) where a Swin-Transformer adapts a pretrained
model to capture multi-scale information from utterances. Self-
supervised adaptor post-training with both block masking pre-
diction and utterance-level contrastive learning addresses distri-
bution shift issues. During finetuning, a graph is constructed
from multiple embedding crops per utterance, allowing GAT-
based temporal aggregation to extract insightful information
from variable-length utterances. In addition to cross entropy,
supervised contrastive learning is used to improve robustness
to ambiguous utterance labels. Extensive SER experiments on
IEMOCAP and MER2023 demonstrate significant performance
gains over SOTA solutions.
Index Terms: Speech Emotion Recognition, Graph Attention
Network, Contrastive Learning, Supervised Contrastive learn-
ing
1. Introduction
Speech Emotion Recognition (SER) is the task of automatically
identifying emotion types expressed in human speech. In recent
years, advances in deep learning have significantly enhanced the
capability of SER systems, facilitating the potential for wide ap-
plications in areas such as human-computer interaction, affec-
tive computing, and mental health monitoring [1, 2].
Existing SER methods generally exploit deep neural net-
works, such as CNN [3], RNN [4], and Transformer [5, 6, 7], to
extract the high-level descriptor (HLD) from low-level descrip-
tors (LLD) like Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC),
spectrograms or raw waveforms, following a conventional ma-
chine learning pipeline to optimize network parameters via
utterance-level supervision. There are several issues with such
approaches, including (1) It is time-consuming to collect and
annotate a large-scale speech emotion corpus. This causes deep
neural SER systems to tend to be over-parametrized with re-
spect to limited training data size. (2) Utterance-level super-
vision is ambiguous, since an utterance may contain several
emotions, or be mainly neutral with just a few milliseconds of
speech defining its emotional character. SER is thus akin to a
detection task of determining whether a certain emotion exists
or not in a given utterance. This makes aggregation-based meth-
ods like average-pooling (AP) and max-pooling (MP) less op-
timal for capturing segment-wise emotional significance, since
**indicates the corresponding author.
they can obscure fine-grained or brief structures within a longer
utterance. Furthermore, SER datasets typically one-hot encode
an emotion class to an utterance, whereas reality is usually less
definitive – different emotions may exist together in real speech
utterances, particularly the neutral class, often with uncertain
class boundaries. Forcing a rigid one-hot encoding on whole
utterances is not only unrealistic but also reduces the robust-
ness of a traditional cross-entropy objective. (3) Variable length
utterances makes it difficult to effectively summarize relevant
temporal information for mapping a sequence to a single utter-
ance label.
Recently, large-scale pretrained models (PTM) such as
Hubert-large [8] and Wav2Vec2.0 [9] have been successfully
exploited to address the data scarcity issue of downstream SER
task, and promising performance has been achieved [10, 11, 12,
13]. Emotion2vec [13] pretrained the initial data2vec model on
open-source unlabeled emotion data via self-supervised online
distillation using both frame-level and utterance-level losses.
Given limited size of downstream corpus like IEMOCAP [14],
the features extracted from Wav2vec2.0 were used to produce
the richer representation as input [10], or as the teacher in trans-
fer learning [12], to train a shallow neural network for fast and
effective SER.
In this paper, we propose an segment-wise speech embed-
ding (SSE) based graph attention network (GAT) for effective
SER, as shown in Fig.1, following an adaptor post-training-
then-finetuning paradigm. Motivated by the success of the
Swin-Transformer in computer vision and speech [15, 6], we
employ it as the backbone of a segment-wise adaptor. In the
post-training stage, Fig. 1a, a self-supervised learning (SSL)
framework is optimized by multiple tasks combining both block
mask prediction and utterance-level contrastive learning. To-
gether with fixed PTMs, this post-training scheme may enable
the SSE extractor to learn representations that are robust to dis-
tribution shifts caused by different speakers and topics.
In the supervised finetuning stage, Fig. 1b, SSEs are first ex-
tracted from multiple crops within an utterance, which are inter-
preted as node representations of a graph. The GAT, with a few
graph attention layers and skip connection, is designed to ag-
gregate and dynamically model the relationship between multi-
ple extracted SSEs. After passing the SSE-domain based graph
through the GAT, the underlying non-Euclidean manifold can
be leveraged to learn effective utterance-level embeddings for
SER. Inspired by [16], supervised contrastive learning (SCL)
is exploited in addition to traditional cross-entropy (CE) loss
to further improve robustness to label ambiguity. Experimen-
tal results on IEMOCAP and MER2023 benchmarks demon-
strate superiority of the proposed method, with the performance
of 76.22%, 76.84% W A and UA for 5-fold cross validation of
IEMOCAP [14], and 71.53% and 0.9844 in terms of F1-score
1893
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-969
Pretrained Hubert-large model Segment-wise adaptor
a) Post-training stage. Self-supervised-learning of the segment-wise speech embedding extractor
b) Fine-tuning stage. Supervised learning of the segment-wise speech embeddings based GAT with CE + SCL loss.
×N
CNN
Encoder
Frame-level 
Transformer
Student 
Swin-Transformer
×3
Teacher 
Swin-Transformer
×3
EMA
 𝑳𝑴𝑷
AP
AP
ProjectorProjector
𝑳𝑲𝑳
utterance 𝑇 𝑇/𝐾
Block Mask
Segment-wise 
speech 
embedding
extractor
GATs
Projection
&Readout
FC 𝑳𝑪𝑬
𝑳𝑺𝑪𝑳
+
utterances
 …
…
SSE
SSE
SSE …
Figure 1:The architecture of the proposed segment-wise embedding based GAT for SER, including: a) Post-training the segment-wise
speech embedding extractor to capture multi-scale information distributed in utterances; self-supervised learning with block mask
prediction and utterance-level contrastive losses are proposed for post-training, and b) Task-specific finetuning with GAT on segment-
wise speech embeddings; supervised contrastive loss (SCL) is applied in addition to CE loss.
and valence mean-square error (MSE) of MER2023.
2. Framework Overview
As shown in Fig. 1, the SSE domain based GAT framework
mainly consists of three modules: (1) Hubert-large as frozen
PTM, (2) a Swin-transformer based segment-wise adaptor, and
(3) a Graph Attention Network (GAT) aggregator for temporal
modeling.
Hubert-largeconsists of CNN encoder and BERT encoder.
The CNN encoder has seven 512-channel convolutional layers
with stride [5,2,2,2,2,2,2,2] and kernel width [10,3,3,3,3,2,2],
which generate the 20ms frame sequence. The BERT en-
coder consists of 24 transformer blocks, which generates 1024-
dimensional feature sequence. Rather than training a feature
extractor from scratch, we leverage a pre-trained HuBERT-
large model to extract deep, context-aware acoustic representa-
tions. Following the implementation of [11], 1024-dimensional
frame-level features from the 19th transformer block are ex-
tracted.
1D Swin-Transformerconsists of a series of Swin blocks with
local window transformer to explore inter-frame information
locally, and shifted window transformer to capture cross-scale
correlations. A patch merging operation is further introduced
to reduce the computational complexity and form a hierarchical
structure. Together with Hubert-large, 1D Swin-Transformer
can act as SSE extractor to map speech segments into fixed-size
embeddings.
GA T aggregatorconsists of two graph attention layers with
residual connection. The input to GAT is graph constructed by
taking SSEs extracted from multiple crops within an utterance
as the node. The weight of each edge is determined using an at-
tention mechanism. After passing through GAT, the utterance-
level representation is derived by averaging the nodes.
Following the adaptor post-training and finetuning
paradigm, the frame is trained in following stages:
Adaptor post-training stage.As shown in (Fig. 1a), the PTM
is frozen, acting as the frame-level feature extractor. Motivated
by DINOv2 [17] and iBOT [18], the segment-wise adaptor is
optimized via self-distillation with siamese architecture,i.e.,
teacher and student Swin-Transformers with frozen transformer
blocks in Hubert-large (i.e.block 1-19 ) shared. Specifically,
two views are constructed by randomly cropping segments
from utterances. After the CNN encoder, the frame-level
sequences are block masked and fed into the student, while the
original sequences passed through teacher branch are used as
supervisions for block masking prediction and utterance-level
contrastive learning.
Finetuning stage.As shown in (Fig. 1b), finetuning on specific
emotion recognition task is performed on SSEs extracted from
multiple crops within an utterance. The feature sequences
with different lengths are mapped into a fixed number of
segments that have same duration by dynamically adjusting
their stride accordingly. Instead of averaging SSEs to form
the single utterance-level representation, we employ the GAT
to perform sequence-to-one modelling. The attention scheme
introduced in GAT can effectively capture segment-wise
emotional significance, complementary to the self-attention
in transformer. Furthermore, to address the label ambiguity
issue, we introduce the SCL in addition to traditional CE
loss to improve the discrimination capability of the model by
increasing the inter-class distances and reducing the intra-class
distances.
3. Methodology
3.1. Self-Distillation based Adaptor Post-training
PTMs like HuBERT-large encapsulate rich phonetic and seman-
tic priors. However, directly fine-tuning these models on small-
scale emotion datasets often leads to severe overfitting. The
proposed 1D Swin-Transformer acts as an adaptor on top of the
frozen pre-trained acoustic features, working at segment level.
Given an input utterance, the frozen PTM extracts frame-
level representationsX∈R T×D . The Swin-Transformer dy-
namically groups these frames into localized non-overlapping
temporal windows. Using hierarchical patch-merging, it com-
presses the temporal resolution while capturing local-to-global
acoustic transients. This process ultimately yields a global
utterance-level representation (i.e., the[CLS]token)u∈
Rd and a sequence of segment-wise patch embeddingsV=
{h1,h 2,...,h K}, whereK≪Tis the downsampled se-
1894
quence length.
To ensure these representations are robust against distribu-
tion shifts caused by varying speakers and recording environ-
ments, we shift away from traditional contrastive learning and
employ a joint self-distillation post-training framework. The
framework consists of a student network parametrized byθ s
and a teacher network parameterized byθ t. The teacher and
student share an identical architecture, but the teacher param-
eters are dynamically updated via an Exponential Moving Av-
erage (EMA) of the student’s parameters. Prior to task-specific
fine-tuning, the adaptor is optimized using three synergistic ob-
jectives:
Utterance-level Self-Distillation.To capture holistic, speaker-
agnostic emotional semantics without relying on negative sam-
ples, we enforce consistency between the global representa-
tions of different augmented views (e.g., temporal masking and
cropping). The student is trained to match the teacher’s global
[CLS]token distribution. LetP s(u)andP t(u)denote the
temperature-scaled softmax probability distributions output by
the student and teacher projection heads, respectively. The KL
lossL KL minimizes the cross-entropy between these distribu-
tions:
LKL =− 1
B
BX
i=1
Pt(ui) logP s(u′
i)(1)
whereu′
i andu i represent the global tokens from the student
and teacher for thei-th instance in a batch of sizeB. To pre-
vent representation collapse, the teacher’s output incorporates a
dynamic centering mechanism.
Patch-level Masked Distillation (mask prediction):To en-
force a deep understanding of fine-grained contextual phonet-
ics and localized prosodic fluctuations, we apply block-wise
temporal masking to the student’s input representations, while
the teacher receives the intact unmasked sequence. LetMde-
note the set of masked temporal indices. Instead of conven-
tional feature reconstruction, the student is optimized to pre-
dict the teacher’s contextualized patch-level distributions for the
masked regions:
LMP =− 1
|M|
X
k∈M
Pt(hk) logP s(hk)(2)
Crucially, to physically align the frame-level input mask with
the Swin-adaptor’s hierarchically downsampled temporal reso-
lution, we apply a synchronized 1D max-pooling operation over
the mask boundaries, ensuring rigorous token-to-mask corre-
spondence.
Feature Uniformity Regularization (KoLeo Loss):To further
secure a well-distributed representation space and mitigate fea-
ture degeneration (i.e. mode collapse), we apply a Kozachenko-
Leonenko (KoLeo) differential entropy estimator on the stu-
dent’sℓ 2-normalized global embeddings. This explicit regular-
ization maximizes the Euclidean distance between each repre-
sentationu i and its nearest neighbour within the batch:
LKoLeo =− 1
B
BX
i=1
log

min
j̸=i
∥ui−u j∥2 +ϵ

(3)
The total post-training objective for the adaptation stage is
the weighted sum of the three losses:
LT otal =L KL +L MP +γL KoLeo (4)
whereγis a scaling coefficient (empirically set to0.1) to bal-
ance the representation uniformity with the primary distillation
objectives.
3.2. Segment-wise Graph Attention Aggregator
After the SSL post-training, the network transitions to the task-
specific fine-tuning phase. A core challenge in SER is mapping
a variable-length sequence of segmentsVto a single emotion
label (i.e. sequence-to-one learning). Emotional expressions
are often sparse so when traditional mean pooling linearly aver-
ages along the temporal axis, transient emotional bursts (e.g., a
sudden exclamation) are inevitably diluted with uninformative
background silence or neutral articulations.
Our idea to dynamically summarize temporal information
is to construct a fully connected intra-utterance directed graph
G= (V,E). Each node corresponds to a segment embedding
hk∈V. The resulting Graph Attention Network (GAT) mod-
els the non-linear spatio-temporal dependencies between distant
segments. The unnormalized attention scoree ij, indicating the
importance of segmentjto segmenti, is computed as:
eij =LeakyReLU

aT [Wghi∥W ghj]

(5)
whereW g∈R d×d is a learnable projection matrix,a∈R 2d
is the attention weight vector, and∥denotes concatenation. The
coefficients are normalized across allKsegments using the
softmax function:
αij = exp(eij)PK
k=1 exp(eik)
(6)
By computingα ij, the GAT effectively acts as a dynamic
topological filter, explicitly assigning higher weights to seg-
ments containing salient emotional fragments. The node rep-
resentations are updated via weighted aggregation:
˜hi =σ
 KX
j=1
αijWghj

(7)
Finally, a global readout function aggregates the updated nodes
{˜h1,..., ˜hK}into a single, purified utterance-level emotion
vectorz utt∈R d.
3.3. Finetuning of SSE based GA T
As aforementioned, a standard cross-entropy loss may be vul-
nerable to the label ambiguity of SER, leading to poorly con-
strained decision boundaries and overlapping manifolds. The
batch-level SCL loss is applied to the utterance-level vectorzutt
to explicitly calibrate the latent feature space and reduce intra-
class variance.
For a training batch ofNutterances, leti∈{1...N}be
the anchor index, andy i be its ground-truth emotion label. The
SCL lossL SCL is formulated as:
LSCL =
NX
i=1
−1
|P(i)|
X
p∈P(i)
log exp(zi·z p/τ)P
a̸=i exp(zi·z a/τ) (8)
whereP(i)is the set of indices of positive samples (utterances
sharing the same emotion labely i),τis a temperature scalar,
andzisℓ 2-normalized.
The overall fine-tuning objective is then the combination
of the robust sequence-to-one classification loss and the metric-
learning SCL loss,L T otal =L CE +λL SCL whereλis a bal-
ancing hyperparameter which set to 0.1 during training process.
1895
Table 1:Comparison with SOTA methods on IEMOCAP &
MER2023 (5-fold CV).
IEMOCAP W A (%) UA (%) F1 (%)
Co-att [19] 71.64 72.70 –
W2v2-PT [10] 67.20 63.40 –
Spk-norm [20] 74.20 – –
GLRF [21] 72.81 73.39 72.92
emotion2vec [13] 71.79 – –
Ours (Baseline)72.60 72.32 71.65
Ours (Proposed)76.2276.84 76.06
MER2023 FS MSE
Baseline AP 65.63 1.0976
Baseline MP 61.16 1.1659
Ours (Baseline)68.46 1.0462
Ours (Proposed) 71.53 0.9844
4. Experiments and Results
4.1 Experimental settings
Datasets and Evaluation Protocols.We evaluate the proposed
framework on two mainstream benchmark datasets: the In-
teractive Emotional Dyadic Motion Capture (IEMOCAP) [14]
and the Multi-modal Emotion Recognition Challenge 2023
(MER2023) [22]. For IEMOCAP, we use only the improvised
dialogues, following standard evaluation protocols, we merge
“happiness” and “excitement” to leave four categorical emo-
tions:Angry, Happy, Neutral,andSad. To rigorously assess
out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization capability across dif-
ferent speakers, we strictly adhere to the Leave-One-Session-
Out (5-fold) cross-validation protocol. Performance is compre-
hensively measured using Unweighted Accuracy (UA) to ac-
count for class imbalance, alongside Weighted Accuracy (W A)
and the Macro-F1 score. For MER2023, we extract the au-
dio from the provided video clips to conduct emotion recog-
nition on speech alone. The task involves recognizing six
discrete emotion categories (Neutral, Anger, Happiness, Sad-
ness, Worry,andSurprise) alongside predicting a continuous
1-dimensionalValencevalue. Following the official baseline
settings, we conduct a 5-fold cross-validation, computing the
Macro-F1 score (FS) for discrete emotion classification and
Mean Square Error (MSE) for Valence estimation.
Implementation Details.Following Section 2, we use a two-
stage training strategy. The waveform encoder and the first 17
transformer blocks of HuBERT-large are frozen, while blocks
18 and 19 are fine-tuned. In the first stage, the Swin-Adaptor
is post-trained with SSL objectives on frozen acoustic features.
In the second stage, HuBERT blocks 18–19, the Swin-Adaptor,
the GAT aggregator, and the classifier are jointly fine-tuned with
labels. We use AdamW with a learning rate of10 −4 and a
batch size of 128, training for 40 epochs on IEMOCAP and
100 epochs on MER2023. For SCL,λ= 0.1andτ= 0.07.
Table 2:Ablation study of proposed components on IEMOCAP .
(Baseline utilizes Frozen HuBERT + Mean Pooling + CE).
Swin+SSL GA T Aggregator SCL Loss W A (%) UA (%) F1 (%)
✗ ✗ ✗ 72.60 72.32 71.65
✓ ✗ ✓ 73.44 74.92 72.62
✓ ✓ ✗ 74.82 75.35 73.80
✓ ✓ ✓ 76.22 76.84 76.06
4.2 Comparison with State-of-the-Art
Table 1 compares our framework against recent state-of-the-art
(SOTA) SER models. Traditional sequence modeling methods
using standard attention (e.g., Co-att [19]) or direct pooling on
pre-trained embeddings (W2v2-PT [10]) struggle to effectively
filter out redundant silence, plateauing around 72% UA. Recent
advanced architectures like GLRF [21] achieve competitive re-
sults, up to 73.39% UA. Benefiting from the robust SSL multi-
scale segment embeddings and the dynamic temporal aggrega-
tion of the GAT, our proposed model sets a new SOTA perfor-
mance of76.80% UAand76.22% W A, substantially outper-
forming all existing baselines.
4.3 Ablation Study
To isolate the contributions of each of the components we pro-
pose, we conduct an ablation study as shown in Table 2.
Effect of SSL Post-training.Replacing the SSL post-trained
Swin-Adaptor with a standard linear layer trained in the same
way (Frozen HuBERT + CE) results in a severe performance
drop. This confirms that extracting multi-scale information and
bridging the domain gap via mask prediction and contrastive
learning are critical.
Effect of GA T Aggregator .Removing the GAT aggregator and
directly applying mean pooling across the segment embeddings
drops the UA to 77.10%. This shows that GAT effectively mit-
igates the signal dilution, such as that caused by uninformative
silence frames within variable-length sequences.
Effect of SCL.Eliminating the SCL loss (λ= 0) leads to a
noticeable decline in Macro-F1 and UA. Clearly SCL is crucial
for maintaining robust inter-class margins and overcoming label
ambiguity.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we presented an effective SSE based GAT frame-
work to exploit the PTM for complex downstream SER task.
There are two main modules in the framework: (1) SSE extrac-
tor with frozen Hubert-large and Swin-Transformer based adap-
tor to extract SSE, and (2) GAT based aggregator to aggregate
SSEs extracted from multiple segments cropped within an ut-
terance. For SSE extraction, the frame-level features were first
extracted from frozen Hubert-large, followed swin-transformer
based adaptor to map the segment into an embedding, which
can effectively capture the multi-scale information distributed
in utterance The GAT based aggregator further extracted the in-
sightful emotional information by mining the relationship be-
tween extracted SSEs. Following the adaptor post-training and
finetuning paradigm, the SSE extractor and GAT based aggre-
gator were optimized in separate stages. The SSE extractor was
optimized via self-distillation with both block mask prediction
and utterance-level contrastive learning, and the GAT aggrega-
tor was optimized jointly with CE and SCL loss.
Experimental results on IEMOCAP and MER2023 bench-
mark demonstrated the superiority performance, with 76.22%
(W A) and 76.84% (UA) for 5-fold cross validation of
IEMOCAP [14], and 71.53%(F1-score) and 0.9844(MSE) of
MER2023.
6. Use of Generative AI Disclosure
The authors used generative AI tools for language polishing and
grammar checking only. All scientific content, system design,
experiments, analysis, and conclusions were created and veri-
fied by the authors.
1896