Beta Rebound as a Neural Signature for Speech Movement: Preliminary 
Evidence Using Magnetoencephalography 
Keerthana Stanley1, Jun Wang1,2, Paul Ferrari3,4 
1 Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, USA 
2 Department of Neurology, The University of Texas at Austin, USA 
3 Jack H. Miller MEG Center, Helen DeVos Children’s Hospital, Corewell Health, USA 
4 Department of Pediatrics and Human Development, Michigan State University, USA  
keerthi.stanley@utexas.edu, jun.wang@austin.utexas.edu, 
paul.ferrari@helendevoschildrens.org  
 
Abstract 
The Post-Movement Beta (13-30Hz) Rebound (PMBR) is a 
motor cortex specific response that follows the termination of a 
movement, reflecting various aspects of performance. While 
widely researched in limb-movement tasks, the PMBR has not 
been extensively studied in speech. This study used 
magnetoencephalography (MEG) to characterize the PMBR 
response in five healthy adults as they spoke five phrases 
varying in articulatory complexity. Source localization was 
conducted using beamforming, and the PMBR was evaluated 
with respect to jaw movement offset. Groupwise results 
revealed that the most complex phrase elicited a stronger 
PMBR than the least complex phrase. The PMBR was found 
bilaterally, but with a stronger response in the language -
dominant hemisphere. These findings provide preliminary 
evidence that the PMBR could be used as an index of 
articulatory complexity during speech production.  The PMBR 
may even serve as a useful neurophysiological feature for 
clinical speech applications. 
Index Terms: neuroimaging, beta rebound, speech articulation 
1. Introduction 
Beta band activity (~13-30 Hz), a neural oscillation associated 
with activation of the sensorimotor cortex, has become a 
feature of interest in motor control research [1, 2]. When a 
movement is initiated, the beta band activity in the 
sensorimotor cortex of the brain decreases, in what is called 
event-related desynchronization (ERD). Upon termination of 
that movement, the beta band power in the cortex then 
rebounds and increases above baseline; this neural response is 
known as the Post-Movement Beta Rebound (PMBR) [2-4]. 
The PMBR response is believed to reflect the inhibition of 
neurons in the motor cortex [2] and has been used in many 
neuroimaging studies to investigate motor inhibition following 
a movement task. The magnitude and duration of the rebound 
response vary according to factors such as the amount of force 
generated during the movement, as well as the duration and 
complexity of the movement [4]. Some studies even report that 
PMBR may be a useful future biomarker for early diagnoses of 
neurodegenerative conditions such as amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) [5, 6]. 
Although the PMBR response has been extensively 
characterized in limb-movement tasks, much less is known 
about how this response manifests during speech production 
tasks. Moreover, it remains unclear whether features of speech, 
such as phonological and phonetic complexity, influence the 
magnitude or duration of the PMBR. 
The PMBR has traditionally been observed and measured 
using electroencephalography (EEG) due to its high temporal 
resolution; however, an increasing number of studies have used 
magnetoencephalography (MEG) to record this brain response 
as well, as it maintains a high temporal resolution while also 
providing a very good spatial resolution [7]. 
In this study, we used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to 
assess whether there is a robust bilateral PMBR in natural 
speech and if phrase length modulates the strength or timing of 
the PMBR. 
2. Related work 
2.1. Early Research on the PMBR 
Voluntary movement is known to be associated with the 
systematic modulation of cortical oscillations [1]. In a 2006 
MEG study by Jurkiewicz et al, the beta band amplitude was 
measured during and after a finger abduction task [7]. During 
the movement, ERD occurred in the postcentral gyrus, meaning 
that the beta band amplitude in that region decreased. However, 
at around 230 ms after the movement offset, event-related 
synchronization (ERS) occurred in the beta band, causing a 
‘rebound’ effect that increased the amplitude of the signal for a 
duration of approximately 680 ms. This phenomenon, known 
as the PMBR, was bilaterally localized to the precentral gyrus 
(motor cortex). The duration of the PMBR can vary; further 
research has shown that that the response can last several 
seconds total [3]. These findings have helped define the latency, 
duration and location of the PMBR response. 
2.2. Modulation of the PMBR 
Later studies sought to determine what features of motor 
control would modulate the PMBR response. An MEG study 
in 2016 (Fry et al., 2016) found that the magnitude and rate-of-
force-development of a motor task modulated the resulting 
PMBR response [8]. Using an isometric wrist flexion 
paradigm, Fry et al. showed that increasing the force of a 
movement resulted in a higher amplitude PMBR, whereas a 
faster rate-of-force-development both increased the PMBR 
amplitude and shortened its duration. Additionally a study led 
by Pakenham et al. in 2020, revealed that task duration also 
modulates the characteristics of the PMBR [9]. In their study, 
participants were instructed to squeeze a grip-force bar with a 
consistent amount of force for various durations, as MEG data 
were recorded. The results of the study revealed that a longer 
task duration yielded a reduced PMBR amplitude . These 
studies together suggest that well-controlled motor tasks can be 
used to find robust patterns in the PMBR modulation, which 
supports why this neural response may, in the future, be an 
ideal biomarker for motor function. 
2.3. The PMBR as a Motor Control Biomarker 
Studies have also explored how the PMBR can be implemented 
to aid in clinical diagnoses or technology development for 
individuals with motor impairment. In 2014, Bizovičar et al. 
administered 2 separate motor tasks – sniffing and flexion of 
1234
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2995
the right index finger – to determine if patients with 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) experienced differences in 
their PMBR response compared to healthy controls [5]. Using 
EEG, the study found that while the healthy controls 
demonstrated a bilateral PMBR for both tasks (as was 
expected), the ALS group exhibited a more unilateral beta 
rebound effect. Another study in 2025, led by Yoganathan et al. 
found that individuals with ALS also experienced a reduced and 
delayed beta rebound, as opposed to healthy controls, when 
completing an isometric hand -gripping task [6]. For 
neurodegenerative conditions like ALS, early diagnosis and 
intervention are critical, and these studies serve as preliminary 
findings that the PMBR may be useful for such clinical 
applications.  
These robust differences in the PMBR have also been 
investigated in covert (imagined) versus overt (real) 
movements, as a broader effort to improve brain -computer 
interface (BCI) technology for individuals with partial or total 
paralysis. In 2012, Solis-Escalante et al. investigated the PMBR 
generated by witholding covert and overt foot dorsiflexion 
movements [2]. Using EEG, this study revealed that 
withholding an overt movement elicited a stronger PMBR and 
longer response duration than withholding a covert task;  
additionally the PMBR responses in covert tasks were more 
challenging to find and were not visible in some participants. 
Recent work by Sisti et al. in 2025 further investigated this 
paradigm by comparing unimanual and bimanual movements 
(the rotation of a dial) for both overt and covert tasks [4]. The 
authors were able to find a PMBR response in even imagined 
(covert) tasks, but supported the findings of Solis-Escalante et 
al. that overt movements generate a stronger modulation of the 
PMBR. While further research needs to be done to quantify the 
covert versus overt differences, these studies suggest that 
PMBR may be a valuable neural feature to help define covert 
and overt execution of the same motor task, which is a critical 
research question in the field of BCI development.  
2.4. The PMBR in Speech Research 
The PMBR literature traditionally has focused on simple body 
movements, such as limb movement tasks. Speech, by contrast, 
is a complex motor phenomenon, making it more challenging 
to fully assess how articulatory change affects the PMBR. Prior 
work from Bartoli et al. in 2016, studied beta rebound in a 
speech perception (listening) task combined with lower lip 
electrical simulation. The authors found a left hemisphere 
lateralization of the PMBR, with a selectively-reduced rebound 
when the place of articulation for the phoneme audio matched 
the place of articulation that was electrically stimulated [10]. 
While these findings explored the correlation between speech 
perception and the modulation of the PMBR, it did not directly 
investigate the production of speech sounds. A subsequent 2021 
study by De Nil et al. did test speech production complexity and 
the PMBR response, but with the use of non-word verbal tasks 
[11]. The primary objective of the study was to compare the 
PMBR elicited during a sequential button press (nonverbal) 
task and a non-word verbal production task. The verbal task 
required participants to produce either a simple , identical 
sequence of phonemes or a more complex pseudorandomized 
sequence of phonemes. The results of this study demonstrated 
that both nonverbal and verbal movements elicit an ERD and 
ERS (rebound) response in the beta band. The authors also 
noted that the complexity of the phonemic sequence in the 
verbal task modulated changes in the strength of the rebound, 
with a stronger ERS found for higher complexity sequences. 
While De Nil et al. provided insights into verbal movement and 
the resulting PMBR, the study did not observe the beta rebound 
generated when using real words or sentences.  
These prior studies served to inform our rationale and 
hypotheses when designing our pilot study. By using real words 
and sentences as our spoken stimuli, our aim was to evaluate 
the cortical responses elicited in natural speech. Additionally, 
our five sentences were chosen from alternative and 
augmentative communication (AAC) literature as sentences 
that are prioritized in clinical speech applications, such as 
speech-BCI development.  
3. Methods 
Five healthy adult subjects (3F, 45-60 yrs old) participated in 
this study. All subjects were English speakers, right-handed, 
and had no known neurological or communication impairment. 
Informed consent was obtained from each participant prior to 
data collection, in compliance with the institutional review 
boards (IRB) of the participating institutions. 
The stimuli consisted of five common phrases that are used 
in AAC clinical applications [12, 13]: 1) Do you understand 
me?; 2) That’s perfect.; 3) How are you?; 4) Goodbye.; 5) I need 
help. The phrases were used as visual stimuli on a screen shown 
90 cm in front of the subject, and the order in which the phrases 
occurred was pseudo-randomized. Phrase complexity was 
ranked using three criteria, which assessed physical aspects of 
articulatory control: average utterance duration, total syllable 
count, and total Word Complexity Me asure (WCM) score 
(Table 1).  WCM is a metric used in speech pathology to score 
the complexity of phonological and phonetic transitions used in 
a word or sentence. [14]. The final ranking was as follows, from 
most complex to least, Do you understand me?, I need help, 
That’s perfect, How are you?, and Goodbye.  
Table 1: Complexity ranking of the five phrases. 
Phrase WCM Syllable 
Count 
Average 
Utterance 
Duration 
Ranking 
Do you 
understa
nd me? 
7 6 1.4109 
High 
complexity 
(#1) 
I need 
help. 5 3 1.0753 
High-
medium 
complexity 
(#2) 
That’s 
perfect. 5 3 1.0129 
High-
medium 
complexity 
(#3) 
How are 
you? 3 3 0.9065 
Low 
complexity 
(#4) 
Goodbye
. 2 2 0.8861 
Low 
complexity 
(#5) 
 
An Elekta Triux Neuromag MEG device (MEGIN) was 
used for the neuromagnetic signal collection at Dell Children’s 
Medical Center in Austin, TX, USA. The MEGIN system is 
housed in a magnetically shielded room (MSR) and has 306 
channels: 102 magnetometer sensors and 204 gradiometer 
sensors (Figure 1). Prior to data collection, a subject head 
coordinate system based on three fiducial points was created 
using the Polhemus FastTrak digitization system. Data were 
recorded with an online hardware filter from 0.03-1000 Hz at a 
sampling rate of 4000 Hz. A s tandard microphone with a 
transducer was placed inside of the MSR to record real-time 
audio from the subjects as they spoke. Additionally, a pressure 
sensor attached to an air bladder was placed onto the chin to 
record real-time jaw movements. Structural MRI data was also 
collected from each subject. 
 
1235
 
Figure 1: MEG data collection setup: the MEG 
machine with a projected display (picture adapted 
from Kwon et al., 2024). 
The experiment was a time-locked delayed overt reading 
task (Figure 2) [12, 13]. Each trial began with a 0.5 second pre-
stimulus measurement (baseline). After the baseline period 
ended, a trigger cued the stimulus phrase (one of the five 
phrases) to be projected onto the screen, where the subject 
silently read the phrase for 1 second (perception). At the end of 
the perception period, the phrase was replaced by a fixation 
cross (+), which cued the subject to silently imagine saying the 
phrase (preparation). Finally, the cross was replaced by an 
asterisk (*) which cued the subject to say the phrase aloud, for 
which they were given up to 2.5 seconds. This protocol was 
repeated until each of the 5 phrases was spoken 100 times each, 
to increase the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). A five-minute break 
was given during the task to address potential fatigue. 
Additionally, head position before and after the task were 
inspected to ensure minimal movement. After data collection, 
the jaw movement onsets and offsets for each phrase were 
manually identified and tagged. 
The acquired signals were then preprocessed using 
BrainWave, a MATLAB toolbox for beamformer source 
analysis of MEG data [15]. A low pass filter was applied at 110 
Hz, and each trial was epoched from -6 to 2 s centered around 
the tagged jaw offset for the given trial. Only gradiometer 
channels were used, and those displaying flat or noisy signals 
were omitted, as well as individual trials in which the sensors 
or jaw movement were overly noisy. 
 
 
Figure 2: Delayed overt reading task protocol. 
(picture adapted from Dash et al., 2020). 
 
Upon completion of preprocessing and artifact removal, 
structural MRI data from each participant was coregistered to 
the MEG data using the placement of the fiducial points from 
the MEG – placed at the nasion point and the left and right 
tragus. After coregistration, a surface model of the inner skull 
was created and the forward model was computed. Brainwave’s 
Synthetic Aperture Magnetometry (SAM) beamformer 
algorithm was applied to localize volumetric beta band 
modulations from 1 second before movement offset to 1.5 
seconds after movement offset in 500ms steps with respect to a 
baseline of -3 to -2.5s. This beamforming method was selected 
due to its supression of non-neuronal sources of noise such as 
jaw movements. Each subject’s images were then normalized 
to a standard template brain for group analysis. This procedure 
allowed for the localization of the oral motor cortex. Finally, 
source-level time series were derived from each indivdual oral 
motor cortex and averaged time-frequency response (TFR) 
plots were constructed using a morlet wavelet. The power in the 
post-movement period was assessed in the group level TFRs.  
4. Results 
Across the five subjects in our study, TFR plotting revealed that 
all of the five spoken phrases elicited a clear beta rebound 
following the termination of jaw movement. To compare the 
PMBR response to articulatory complexity, the two most 
complex phrases (Do you understand me? and I need help.) and 
the two least complex phrases (How are you? and Goodbye.) 
were then grouped and averaged together. The TFR plotting 
revealed that, across subjects, the higher complexity phrases 
elicited a stronger modulation of the PMBR than the lower 
complexity phrases. Figure 3 shows the TFR plots averaged 
from all five participants, where Figure 3a (top) plots the low 
complexity phrases and Figure 3b (bottom) plots the high 
complexity phrases. The black retangles mark the region of the 
interest (ROI) for the PMBR, within which we can see a 
stronger response for the higher complexity phrases. 
 
  
Figure 3: TFR activity of the left oral motor cortex 
averaged across subjects in the two low complexity 
phrases (A) and the two high complexity phrases (B).  
1236
The blue represents the event-related 
desynchronization (ERD) occurring during speech and  
the red-orange represents the e vent-related 
synchronization (ERS) after movement offset (the 
PMBR response). The black box indicates the ROI, at a 
time range of 0.25 -1.25 s post-movement and a 
frequency range of 15-30 Hz. 
Surface plotting of the beta oscillations across participants 
and phrases revealed a strong bilateral PMBR response. 
Additionally, within the left hemisphere, the elicited PMBR had 
both a longer duration and a stronger amplitude, with the 
rebound of the left hemisphere preceding that of the right 
hemisphere (Figure 4). 
 
 
Figure 4: Beta band activity across subjects, localized 
onto a pial surface plot. At 0 – 0.5 s relative to the 
termination of articulatory movement, the PMBR 
response begins in the left hemisphere (yellow) 
whereas the right hemisphere still shows residual 
ERD (blue). From 0.5 – 1 s after, a PMBR is seen in 
bilateral BA4 and BA6. 
5. Discussion & Future Work 
This pilot study demonstrated that a strong bilateral PMBR 
response can be elicited, measured, and localized during natural 
speech tasks. The findings of the TFR plots suggest that 
increasing the motor complexity of a phrase may be reflected in 
the characteristics of the resulting PMBR. Specifically, this 
study provides preliminary evidence that increasing the 
articulatory complexity of a spoken phrase may result in a 
stronger PMBR. However, we have yet to identify which 
specific articulatory features lead to a stronger PMBR 
modulation, which will be a future aim for this project.  
The localization of the PMBR within source space in this 
study supports prior work which has described the PMBR as a 
bilateral phenomenon localized to the motor cortex [7]. 
Additionally, this study provides preliminary evidence that, for 
motor speech, there is an earlier ERS (rebound) in the language-
dominant, left hemisphere.  
As this is a pilot study, there are limitations to consider, the 
major limitation being sample size. For this paper, we only have 
the data from five participants. In order to truly quantify the 
significance of the PMBR modulations observed in these 
speech tasks, further study with an increased sample size is 
needed [16]. With a larger sample size we will be able to 
conduct further statistical analysis on the PMBR response 
across subjects for each spoken phrase. An additional challenge 
and limitation in this project was defining the true baseline 
recording to compare the PMBR to. In this study, the baseline 
recording was taken from -3 to -2.5 seconds prior to movement 
onset and was meant to record cortical activity during the pre-
stimulus segment of each tria l. However, neuroimaging 
literature suggests that the beta band experiences long-lasting 
residual modulation after a motor task [3,7], which leads us to 
believe that increasing the duration of the pre-stimulus segment 
(e.g., to around 5 seconds) will allow us to get a more accurate 
baseline for comparison. It is reasonable that a different task 
design would allow us to analyze our data with respect to a 
proper baseline.With those limitations in mind, the findings in 
this study should be drawn with caution. 
Other future directions for this work include involving 
participants with neurogenic motor speech disorders (e.g., these 
with ALS or Parkinson’s disease), to investigate motor speech 
PMBR differences in clinical populations.  
In conclusion, this pilot study supports the argument that 
the PMBR is a measurable response for articulatory tasks and 
that, in these tasks, there is response bias to the language -
dominant hemisphere. Additionally this study provides 
preliminary evidence that the complexity of articulation in 
spoken words or phrases modulates the PMBR. Overall, these 
findings lead us to conclude that the PMBR may be a useful 
cortical feature to study motor speech control, potentially aiding 
in clinical applications such as pre-surgical brain mapping, 
disease diagnosis, and the development of noninvasive speech-
BCI.  
6. Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the University of Texas System 
Brain Initiative grant under award number 362221 and partly 
supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under the 
awards R03DC013990 and R01DC016621 awarded to the 
second author. The content is solely the responsibility of the 
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of 
the NIH. The authors would like to thank Karinne Berstis, Dr. 
Saleem Malik, Dr. Mark McManis, Dr. Kristin Teplansky, Dr. 
Daragh Heitzman, Dr. Angel W. He rnandez, and the 
volunteering participants. 
7. Generative AI Disclosure 
Generative AI tools were used to improve grammatical quality 
and clarity of the manuscript. The authors take full 
responsibility for the scientific content presented in this paper.