CalliOpeNLP: A Standalone Digital Health Voice Data Collection Research Tool 
 
Brian Stasak1, Rebecca Li1, Antonia Chacon1, Rebecca Black1 and Cate Madill1 
1 Voice Research Laboratory, Sydney School of Health Sciences, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Australia 
{brian.stasak, reli2670, antonia.chacon, rebecca.black, cate.madill}@sydney.edu.au 
 
Abstract 
Obstacles reported in manual health voice data collections 
include addressing compliance, annotation standards (e.g., 
labels, segmentation, transcription), security, interoperability 
(i.e., streamlined transfer), and in -person interaction bias. 
Automation is a logistical solution to mitigate these manual 
voice collection challenges. This paper introduces 
CalliOpeNLP, a new python-based open-source automated tool 
designed to support researchers working on clinical voice 
health data biobanks. While private co mmercial fee-based 
automated voice data collection software exist, CalliOpeNLP 
offers a free, standalone automated option which avoids 
unsecure data transfer. CalliOpeNLP includes computer -
generated spoken-text instructions for 18 clinically validated 
voice tasks. CalliOpeNLP records, labels, and tracks patients' 
compliance using low latency voice-to-text transcript analytics. 
This tool provides a new practical application enhancing 
automated voice data collection capabilities. 
Index Terms: data harvesting, speech science, voice software 
1. Introduction 
High-quality biomedical data has wide appeal to healthcare 
clinicians, researchers, and engineers alike because it leads to 
new insights about disorder symptomology, diagnostic 
evidence and progression characteristics. Carefully planned 
data collection procedures are the starting point for high-quality 
health data, which later serves to promote transparent cross-
validation reproducibility of critical findings [1]. Despite the 
demand for high-quality health data, a recent biomedical 
literature review [2] discovered that large discrepancies in data 
standards still remain, especially in how it is collected at the 
initial point of capture.  
Data quality concerns extend to recorded biomedical voice 
data, whereby traditional in-person laboratory data collection 
processes have frequently shown data integrity issues linked to 
collection methodology discrepancies [3-6]. For instance, in-
person patient voice collection studies often gather inconsistent 
data due to interaction bias [7]. This effect is particularly of 
concern when manually recording speech data in -person, 
because  sociolinguistically, voices are strongly connected with 
individual speakers' identity, habitual verbal idiolect and 
emotional expression. The effect of interactive bias can vary 
due to many factors like the data collector's or patient's 
background (e.g., age, gender, ethnicity, culture, personality), 
trained voice experience, social cues (e.g., non-verbal, verbal), 
and the Hawthorne Effect [7-9], whereby rather than behaving 
naturally, a person alters behaviour/s to try to reflect more of 
what they think a data collector desires.  
Large differences in data collection interaction have been 
observed when comparing strict research protocol interaction 
methodology to the relatively more natural interactive approach 
found in clinical settings [10]. For the latter, a clinician may use 
strategies to better connect with a patient to establish a positive 
rapport. Incidentally, research clinicians may have more 
difficulty avoiding therapeutic investigation during patients' 
baseline initial data collections. During voice data recordings, 
undesirable clinician-to-patient therapeutic factors may include 
probing for patient voice task re-attempts, visual cues, and/or 
excessive task examples in a manner which is dissimilar across 
patients sampled – therefore, compromising the standardized 
collection methodology. To mitigate interaction bias, 
automated data collection software can help to make voice 
collection process procedures more consistent across a sampled 
population by minimizing in -person clinician-to-patient 
interaction [11-13]. 
Another human factor concern rarely discussed in the voice 
health data collection literature is addressing patients' levels of 
task participation and insecurity. For decades, psychological 
studies [14-16] conducted across a large number of diverse 
populations have demonstrated that 'public speaking' is the 
number one most common phobia reported. For singing tasks, 
many individuals may find this type of activity unnerving in the 
presence of a trained clinician and a continuous recording 
device. Surveyed voice studies [14-18] have demonstrated that 
individuals reported feeling more at ease using automated 
human-computer recording data collections. In a mental health 
voice data collection study [18] it was found that 85% of 
patients using an automated software “strongly agreed” to share 
personal information with a virtual agent. Moreover, patients 
surveyed therein reported a decrease in perceived 
bias/judgement and increased rapport when using the 
automated voice collection software when compared to 
traditional face-to-face human collection techniques [18]. 
These studies [14-18] demonstrate that automated data 
collection can foster more open patient self -reporting, 
positioning it as a strong alternative to traditional manual 
methods. 
Manual voice data collection involves patient-administrator 
interaction which increases the risk of recording extraneous 
unrelated voice task data (i.e., private discussions, 
interruptions). Recently, it has been shown [19], that during 
manually administered voice health data collection, substantial 
amounts of recorded audio-voice data are unrelated to the 
targeted voice protocol tasks (i.e., up to three times longer than 
the combined segmented voice task recordings). Consequently, 
this extraneous data results in longer recording sessions, 
undesirable crosstalk/noise, increased manual segmentation 
effort costs, and inflated data storage requirements. Automating 
voice task segmentation alone can significantly reduce manual-
related time effort, costs, and potential data annotation errors. 
Another drawback during in-person manual collections is 
that recorded voice data is often only later assessed manually 
for quality control after the entire collection is completed. 
Therefore, meaning that compliance/quality issues are not 
immediately addressed and rectified while the voice participant 
is present (i.e., increasing the opportunity for data retention). 
Automated voice collection tools can apply data quality control 
metrics at the point of capture, flagging recordings to ensure 
that a collection retains a high-quality standard. Automated 
voice data collection tools provide a repeatable, systematic 
format with uniform cohort instructions, task order, and 
automated voice data analysis that can provide near-real time 
4396
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1783
task compliance feedback without the need of an in-person data 
collect administrator; thus, allowing multiple collection sites 
(e.g., clinics, hospitals, labs) to obtain data structured in an 
identically instructed format. Aggregately, these automated 
considerations produce datasets that are immediately available 
for statistical modelling and interoperability with near real-time 
migration to state-of-the-art biomedical AI applications [5]. 
The element of data migration workflow design is also an 
important advantage to automated voice data collection tools. 
For example, automation can consolidate the information 
collected, facilitate data interoperability, deliver quicker 
analysis/reporting and decision-making, simultaneously 
dispatching different research teams' needs. Generally, the 
more time that is spent manually converting data where it is 
needed, the lower the return is on its use due to access delay, 
disorganization, data inconsistency, security, data duplication 
redundancy, and machine learning data transformation. A core 
purpose behind automated data collection is to minimize human 
interaction involving data preparation (i.e., reducing human-
error, workflow times, costs). 
Recent digital health studies [10-13] have shown persuasive 
clinical utility in the use of automated data collection software 
in strengthening healthcare researchers' understanding of 
common disorders. Further, healthcare data collection studies 
[4, 6, 11-13] have indicated that new automated human -
computer software healthcare data collection tools help to 
advance state-of-the-art AI technology, facilitating accelerated 
large-scale research data biobanking, analysis and automated 
screening timelines. While software data collection tools have 
been leveraged in many healthcare domains to improve data 
quality, only recently have some of its advantages been 
explored in speech voice pathology [20]. For example, ongoing 
voice data collection efforts by the multidi sciplinary 
Bridge2AI-Voice consortium [6], have implemented a 
standardized smart device software protocol to help ensure data 
collection quality and user task compliance [5]. However, the 
automated voice collection software is unavailable to the 
public, and this smart device based software is inclusive only to 
voice researchers involved directly in the consortium. 
There is a need to increase the available number of open-
source high-quality clinically validated voice health datasets 
while also advocating for more uniform collection standards 
and voice task instructions. The future role of automated voice 
health data collection software holds promise because it enables 
the gathering of organized large-scale, high-quality data for 
voice biomarker analysis while also addressing the 
aforementioned inefficiencies existing in manual methods. In 
this paper, the CalliOpeNLP automatic voice data collection 
software is introduced and its processes are detailed. This new 
open-source tool was designed to aid health 
clinicians/researchers and to advocate uniformity in voice data 
collection standards. But, there could be additional non-medical 
uses for CalliOpeNLP, such as spoken language, cognitive, 
paralinguistic, linguistic, command-and-control, and human-
computer interaction voice data collection contexts. 
2. Methodology  
2.1. CalliOpeNLP Design and Processes 
The CalliOpeNLP consists of 5 main stages described herein, 
whereas leveraged algorithmic details are outlined in Section 
2.2. Shown in Fig. 1, the Pre-Stage voice data collection 
process begins with the patient-user answering a small number 
of demographic questions. These patient-user enquires include: 
(1) name/identification; (2) age (years); (3) gender identity 
(female, male, non-binary, etc.); (4) height (meters); and (5) 
English native language status (no, yes). These questions are 
important to record because each relates to demographic -
specific vocal attribute norms, clinical illness prevalence, and 
physiological sexually dimorphic acoustic-voice attributes [21]. 
Using a printed text message on the computer screen, each 
patient-user is cued to voluntarily answer these questions via a 
keyboard. 
During Stage-1 (Fig. 1) the CalliOpeNLP software verbally 
introduces itself using computer synthesized speech, and 
informs the patient-user how many total voice tasks will be 
conducted during the data collection session. For each 
individual voice task, unique verbal (synthesized speech) and 
visual (text) instruction cues are provided to the patient-user to 
help reinforce specific task compliance. This clinical voice task 
protocol and its instructions have previously been used to 
manually collect hundreds of patients' voice data [22].  Shown 
in Fig. 1, Stage-1, each voice task is categorized as either 'read' 
or 'performative'. The 'read' tasks include read-text speech 
activities, whereas 'performative' tasks are related to controlled 
vocal exercises. After completion of each voice task, an 
individual audio-voice recording is automatically created. 
The clinical voice task protocol includes the following 18 
tasks: Cape-V/R phrases [23, 24]; counting 1-to-10; counting 
80-to-90; singing 'Happy Birthday'; 3 sustained /a/ maximum 
phonations; sustained /s/ maximum phonation; sustained /z/ 
maximum phonation; pitch maximum range high-to-low; pitch 
maximum range low-to-high; singing a short popular song 
excerpt (i.e., nursery rhyme, radio hit); 'Rainbow Passage' [25]; 
3 sound /a/ dynamics (e.g., loud, normal, quiet); vowel onset 
phrases; and 'My Voice' (i.e., describe your voice heath and 
quality). Additionally, there is an optional natural freeform 
voice recording task regarding the patient-user's experience and 
thoughts on using the automated CalliOpeNLP tool. 
 
Figure 1: Workflow detailing major steps in the automated 
CalliOpeNLP voice data collection process. Read tasks are 
evaluated for user compliance based on ASR transcripts. 
4397
In Stage-2 (Fig. 1), each voice task audio-voice recording 
is processed using a light-weight automatic speech recognition 
(ASR) model, whereby transcripts of what the patient-user said 
during each task are generated. While all the voice tasks are 
processed using ASR, in Stage-3 (Fig. 1), only the 'read' tasks 
are evaluated for patient -user compliance. Using natural 
language processing text analytics, each of the 'read' voice task 
activities are automatically evaluated for patient -user 
compliance by comparing the ground-truth task texts to the 
patient-user's transcripts. The current CalliOpeNLP version 
does not automatically evaluate the 'performative' voice task 
activities for compliance because ASR models have difficulty 
in accurately recognizing sung speech and/or 'performative' 
voice task activities which only make single use of a vowel 
sound. However, for some 'performative' voice task activities 
(e.g., pitch range), instructions include an audio playback 
example which aids the participant-user in knowing how the 
voice activity should be executed. 
A predetermined compliance threshold is used to determine 
whether a patient-user will receive a printed text compliance 
warning notice or not. This warning is used as an automated 
nudging technique to remind the patient-user to try to adhere to 
the task directions as closely as possible. During Stage-3, a 
patient-user can freely choose to redo a task/s. This option was 
added to allow a task redo in instances where the patient-user 
thought a poor voice exemplar was recorded (i.e., misread 
aloud, interruption occurred, excessive coughing). After all 
voice tasks are completed, in Post-Stage (Fig. 1), a voice report 
is automatically generated for the clinician or data administrator 
to later review. A visual indicator text display lets the patient-
user know that the voice data collection protocol has been 
successfully completed. CalliOpeNLP is available for the 
public and researchers via open -source download at: 
https://github.com/DrBrianStasak/CalliOpeNLP/ 
2.2. Algorithmic Details 
The CalliOpeNLP tool was developed using python-based code 
in a PyCharm CE environment [26]. However, CalliOpeNLP 
code will also operate in other free computing platforms, such 
as Jupyter Notebook and Spyder. The CalliOpeNLP leverages 
well-documented speech/text processing packages, which have 
been heavily utilized in many previous health data research 
publications [27]. CalliOpeNLP code utilizes many commonly 
used python-based toolkit packages, such as NumPy, SciPy and 
includes in-built python call-functions like datetime, os, and 
sys. All of the code is contained in a main .PY file. 
Given that there are currently no open-source automatic 
voice health data collection tools, for practical purposes, the 
initial proposed CalliOpeNLP automated voice data collection 
tool focused on low -latency functionality; but, more 
sophisticated algorithmic modification is planned in the near 
future. A fundamental objective for this project was to compile 
well-known stable python-based packages to help streamline an 
automated voice health data collection process. The advantage 
of leveraging these python-based packages is that it allows non-
engineering background users to have shared algorithmic 
transparency, while also allowing the ability for users to more 
easily modify CalliOpeNLP source code and/or parameters to 
fit new data collection needs (i.e., this would be more difficult 
to do in private pre-packaged software). For example, its tasks 
can be easily altered by relatively inexperienced coders for 
other voice-related study and application contexts (e.g., 
language/accent, emotion, picture/story-telling). 
To set the CalliOpeNLP apart from other potential voice 
data collection tools, its design utilizes spoken task instructions 
using text-to-speech voice synthesis. The PPTTSX3 toolkit was 
employed [28] due to its offline function and quick text -to-
voice function. A computer generated synthesized Indian -
English male accented speech was chosen because it was more 
natural sounding (i.e., less musical, less noise artifacts) and 
perceptual listening research [29] has shown that individuals 
prefer less robotic accents. However, the PPTTSX3 voice 
accent can be easily modified by selecting the 'voice_type' 
parameter to any one of the dozens of voice -accents its 
packaged toolkit includes (e.g., American, British, French, 
Italian). Per voice task, in addition to the spoken instructional 
cued dialog, the CalliOpeNLP uses visual text cues to help 
guide the patient-user. For increased patient-user clarity, all 
voice tasks include a highlighted italic font styled in a green 
color, providing a reminder what constitutes the voice task 
stimuli versus instructions. This helps avoid instances whereby 
patient-users might accidently read the task instructions during 
their audio-voice recordings. 
To record and save individual audio-voice task recordings, 
the python-based 'sounddevice' package [30] was utilized. This 
digital recording package allows in-built computer or line-in 
microphone inputs using a high-quality 44.1kHz sampling rate 
(16-bit mono) setting. Depending on the specific voice task, a 
recording length timer was pre-set to automatically stop the 
recording. The recording length timer ranged from 7 -to-45 
seconds. This timer-based recording approach was used to 
avoid excessive patient-user interaction with the keyboard (i.e., 
they could manually stop recording) and also to avoid the need 
for real-time voice processing demands (i.e., using voice 
activity detection to detect when a task was completed). For 
each task, patient-users are instructionally reminded to remain 
silent once finished with the task and that the recording will stop 
automatically. If a patient-user require more time per task, the 
pre-set recording length timer parameter can easily be adjusted 
within the code; or a patient-user can choose to re-attempt a task 
recording. 
Each of the task recordings are individually automatically 
labelled using a uniform annotated format: <user_name_ID>_ 
<month_day_year>_<specific_task>. This automated and 
organized labelling process allows all data collected by the 
CalliOpeNLP to have an interoperable data stream output, 
improving pre-segmented task-dependent analysis, data 
structures feature extraction and/or specificity for task-
dependent machine learning modeling applications. Further, it 
removes the tedious task of manual human task segmentation 
and labelling typically required when a full-session audio-voice 
recording approach is used (i.e., where all the tasks are recorded 
in one long audio file). 
To acquire voice task transcripts, the CalliOpeNLP used the 
open-source state-of-the-art Whisper automatic speech 
recognition (ASR) [31]. The Whisper ASR was pre-trained on 
680k hours of labelled audio-voice recording data, which 
included robust accents, multiple languages, and sound 
environment conditions. The Whisper ASR model has 
demonstrated strong generalization capabilities across multiple 
datasets without the need for fine-tuning to achieve a relatively 
low word-error rate, epecially in high-quality microphone quiet 
laboratory conditions [31]. An additional advantage in using the 
Whisper ASR pre-built model is that it does not require any 
internet connectivity and/or third-party data transfer; thus, 
providing further biobank data collection privacy/security. 
The 'tiny' Whisper ASR model [31], which used an 
architecture of 4-layers with 39m parameters, was chosen due 
to its low-latency processing time when compared to the 'large' 
model option which used 32-layers with 1550m parameters. For 
example, after a patient-user records a voice task recording, the 
'tiny' model can process the recording in <3 seconds. Because 
illness can impact speech behavior and voice quality, the 
Whisper ASR word error rate is anticipated to be lower for 
some CalliOpeNLP patient-users. But, if patient-user time 
commitment session duration is not a factor and more accurate 
transcripts are an important part of a health voice research 
investigation, the 'large' Whisper ASR model can be 
implemented by modifying the CalliOpeNLP ASR parameter 
model option (i.e., processing could take >30 seconds per task). 
Moreover, pre-trained voice disorder specific ASR-models, 
such as Auphoria [32] (i.e., specifically trained on clinical 
pathological voice populations) can be implemented to improve 
automated voice-transcript accuracy. The output of the Whisper 
ASR includes a language probability estimate (i.e., what 
4398
language was spoken, identify possible foreign accent); an ASR 
transcript confidence metric (i.e., could help determine poorer 
intelligibility, weaker transcription reliability); entire task 
transcripts; and time-stamped phrase-level task transcripts (i.e. 
provides start-to-end time points per utterance phrase). 
While 'performative' voice tasks are not yet automatically 
evaluated for patient-user compliance, the 'read' tasks undergo 
a near real-time compliance assessment using natural language 
processing metrics. For each 'read' voice task, to determine if a 
patient-user followed the directions correctly, text-analytics is 
used. The python-based Levenshtien distance metric [33] and 
python-based FuzzyWuzzy toolkit token-set-ratio fuzzy string 
matching [34] are applied to determine, from 0.00 (no match) 
to 1.00 (complete match), how alike the the patient -user's 
transcript was to the ground-truth task text. The Levenshtien 
distance is often used in natural language processing to measure 
text similarity, and its algorithm takes into account the 
chronological position of words and word modifiers. Based on 
an offshoot of the Levenshtien distance, the token -set-ratio 
fuzzy string-matching metric was also implemented, whereby 
word order does not matter in its calculation. For example, if a 
dyslexic patient-user accidently flip-flopped all the words in a 
recorded read aloud sentence, a 1.00 token-set-ratio would be 
achieved because all word-tokens were still present in the 
recording. 
A pre-set relatively conservative compliance threshold of 
0.70 is the current CalliOpeNLP setting. The reason why it is 
set lower than 1.00, is that having the compliance setting in a 
mid-high range allows some flexibility for naturally occurring 
read-speech errors (e.g., deletions, insertions, repeats) and/or 
potential ASR transcript errors. If a patient-user produces a 
score below the threshold, an automatic warning reminding the 
patient-user to follow the directions is printed to the screen, and 
a re-attempt may be selected by the patient-user. Further testing 
is ongoing to try to determine optimal CalliOpeNLP 
compliance thresholds given different tasks and/o