Lightweight Emotion Recognition with Disjoint Modality Fusion
Serkan Sulun ID
INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal
Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Portugal
serkan.sulun@inesctec.pt
Abstract
Modern speech emotion recognition methods typically use large-
scale models and multimodal fusion, often resulting in signifi-
cant computational overhead that limits real-world deployment
on consumer hardware. We propose Light-DMF, a lightweight
model designed to classify emotions from audio and text both
independently and through a fused pathway. Our disjoint archi-
tecture supports mixed-modal data where audio or text can be
present, absent, or contain conflicting emotional cues and labels.
Our model has fewer than 65k trainable parameters and achieves
a real-time factor below 1 in CPU-only inference. We provide
open-source code and a demo to facilitate future research and
offer a speech emotion recognition tool for the general public.1
Index Terms: speech emotion recognition, multimodal fusion,
low-latency speech processing
1. Introduction
Automatic speech emotion recognition (SER) enables inferring
the emotions expressed in spoken communication, with wide-
ranging applications in healthcare [1], multimedia analysis [2],
and education [3]. A reliable SER system typically benefits from
multimodal information: acoustic and prosodic cues such as
pitch, energy, and speaking rate obtained from the raw audio
signal, and the contextual information from the uttered text, both
of which inform the conveyed emotion.
Real-world emotional cues in tone (audio) and content (text)
can diverge, as in the cases of sarcasm and irony. SER datasets
can contain identical text spoken with varying emotional tones
(audio-only), audio and text that agree in emotion, or audio and
text with conflicting emotional labels [ 4]. Motivated by this
diversity, we propose the Light-DMF (Disjoint Modality Fusion)
model, which classifies audio and text both independently and
through a fused pathway within a unified architecture, enabling
robustness to conflicting multimodal cues. Our model’s flex-
ibility allows for training on a mixture of datasets regardless
of whether they contain or lack specific audio or text modal-
ities, which further increases its robustness. We also ensure
that our model remains lightweight by reusing automatic speech
recognition (ASR) features and employing parameter sharing
from the disjoint to the fused pathway. These optimizations
enable the processing of input speech on CPU-only hardware at
faster-than-real-time speed.
2. Light-DMF model
Our model architecture is shown in Figure 1. Standard SER
datasets provide the uttered text alongside the audio. SER mod-
1https://sulun.org/lightdmf
Whisper ASR
"The quick brown
fox jumps over 
the lazy dog"
Text
model
Self-
attention
+ average
Text
sentinel
Fusion
head
Audio
KV
Text
Q
Text
KV
Self-
attention
+ average
Audio
Qself
Audio
Qcross
Text
head
Audio
head
Cross-
attention
+ average
Text
prediction
Fusion
prediction
Audio
prediction
Audio
encoder
Text
decoder
Text encoderAudio encoder
Audio
sentinel
Figure 1:The Light-DMF architecture. Sentinels are four trained
vectors indicating the presence or absence of audio and text
features. Inputs to the fusion head are concatenated along the
feature dimension. Q, K, and V represent query, key, and value,
respectively.
els often extract audio and text features using designated general-
purpose encoders [ 4]. However, real-world scenarios do not
explicitly provide the uttered text. To extract the text from the
audio signal prior to feature extraction, an additional automatic
speech recognition (ASR) model, such as Whisper [ 5], is re-
quired. This introduces significant overhead and increases the
overall latency.
We address this problem by probing Whisper’s internal ac-
tivations and extracting features after its audio encoder to feed
as audio features to the trained classification modules. Though
5912
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia

Whisper’s primary function is ASR rather than general-purpose
audio representation learning, we nonetheless extract features
from its audio encoder and expect that the subsequent trainable
layers can adapt these encodings for SER. This approach allows
us to obtain both audio features and the uttered text from a single
model, significantly reducing computational overhead. To re-
duce the computation further, we choose a lightweight backbone
consisting of Distil-Whisper-large-v3 [ 6] for audio encoding
and all-MiniLM-L6-v2 [7] for text encoding. These frozen pre-
trained models extract temporal feature sequences that are fed
into the subsequent trained modules.
We design our architecture to be flexible enough to han-
dle mixed-modality data in which audio and text data can
be missing or contain contrasting labels. This enables train-
ing on a variety of emotion recognition datasets, increasing
the robustness of our model. We use a mixture of SER
datasets: IEMOCAP and MELD, which contain both audio
and text, and CREMA-D, RA VDESS, and TESS, which con-
sist of various emotional utterances of the same text and are
therefore treated as audio-only datasets (see [ 4] for a com-
prehensive survey). We also incorporate the text-emotion
dataset GoEmotions to enhance our model’s text-processing
modules [ 8]. We introduce four learned sentinel vectors to
encode the presence or absence of each modality explicitly:
audio-present, audio-absent, text-present, and
text-absent. These vectors are prepended to the embedded
sequences, while missing modalities are represented with zero-
padded sequences, enabling the model to handle mixed-modality
samples (audio-only, text-only, or multimodal) within a single
minibatch. When a modality is missing, subsequent attention
modules only process the sentinel vectors through masking.
The text and audio encoders consist of single linear layers
followed by layer normalization. These project the embeddings
into a common, significantly lower dimensionality to minimize
model size, as well as time and memory complexity. We subse-
quently process these features using attention modules to exploit
temporal information. Dedicated self-attention modules process
text and audio independently, enabling modality-specific emo-
tion prediction. We use a cross-attention module to fuse text
and audio features and obtain a joint prediction. To maintain
a lightweight architecture, we use unidirectional audio-to-text
attention instead of bidirectional attention. We treat text as the
primary modality and audio as auxiliary, as our preliminary ex-
periments showed that using text alone outperforms using audio
alone. To further reduce complexity, the encoded keys and val-
ues of the text features are shared across modules. Separate
audio queries for self- and cross-attention allow for selective, in-
dividual attention to each modality. The outputs of the attention
modules are fed into individual classification heads. Importantly,
the text and audio classification modules are disjoint, receiv-
ing information only from their respective branches to improve
robustness when emotional cues conflict. A fusion head then
processes the concatenation of all attention outputs to provide
a more informed prediction when the audio and text emotions
agree, as observed in the majority of SER datasets. As a result,
our model outputs three predictions, corresponding to text-only,
audio-only, and audio-text fusion.
To enable mixed-dataset training, we normalize emotion
labels by mapping synonymous labels to a unified set of cate-
gories, yielding the classes: angry, excited, happy, neutral, and
sad. We minimize cross-entropy loss for the text, audio, and
fusion components, weighting each by 1/3 when the correspond-
ing modality is available. We randomly drop one modality with
a 0.1 probability to improve the sentinel training. To keep our
model lightweight, we use a dimensionality of 32 and 4 attention
heads, resulting in only 64k trainable parameters. We implement
our model using PyTorch and train on a single NVIDIA A100
80GB PCIe GPU.
3. Inference demo
We present an open-source demo on Google Colab for classi-
fying emotions from microphone input or uploaded audio files.
The pipeline produces disjoint and fused emotion predictions
from audio and text, along with transcripts for each uttered sen-
tence. To improve efficiency further, Whisper processes the
entire audio in a single forward pass, generating both audio fea-
tures and corresponding text with timestamps corresponding to
sentence-level segments. Using these timestamps, we segment
the audio features into sentence-level chunks and process them
in parallel in the remainder of the network, enabling per-sentence
predictions in a single pass. We also report runtime in a CPU-
only setting using an Intel Core i7-5600U with 16 GB RAM. For
one minute of input audio, the model requires 0.81 minutes of
processing time, achieving faster-than-real-time performance.
4. Conclusion
Ultimately, Light-DMF demonstrates that multimodal SER is
achievable without prohibitive computational costs. Our model
achieves faster-than-real-time speed on CPU-only hardware us-
ing fewer than 65k trainable parameters, while producing disjoint
predictions that are robust to conflicting emotional cues in text
and audio. Our demo serves as a real-time capable SER tool
accessible to the general public without GPU resources, and our
open-source code provides a baseline for future research.
5. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were only used for manuscript editing.