Stuttering Classification and Segmentation with Attention-Based Multiple
Instance Learning
Petar Suˇsac ID 1, Sebastian P . BayerlID 2, Hrvoje Dˇzapo ID 1
1 University of Zagreb Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, Croatia
2 Rosenheim Technical University of Applied Sciences, Germany
{petar.susac,hrvoje.dzapo}@fer.unizg.hr, sebastian.bayerl@th-rosenheim.de
Abstract
Stuttering detection and classification using deep learning meth-
ods has the potential to improve the process of stuttering severity
assessment. Most stuttering classification datasets provide clip-
level labels, making them unsuitable for fine-grained frame-level
classification needed to determine the duration of individual
stuttering dysfluencies. To overcome this challenge, we present
a multiple instance neural network architecture based on fine-
tuned wav2vec 2.0, WavLM and Whisper encoders. We apply
instance- and embedding-based multiple instance learning ap-
proaches to train models on a clip-level dataset for both clip-level
and frame-level stuttering classification tasks. Our results show
a 23% improvement in frame-level F1 score and between 2%
and 9% in clip-level F1 score, demonstrating the ability of our
models to utilize clip-level data for frame-level segmentation.
Index Terms: stuttering, speech classification, multi-label clas-
sification, wav2vec 2.0, WavLM, Whisper
1. Introduction
Stuttering is a speech fluency disorder characterized by involun-
tary dysfluencies such as blocks, repetitions and prolongations
that disrupt the natural flow of speech. The research of stuttering
detection and classification using machine learning methods has
gained popularity in recent years due to its potential to automate
the process of stuttering severity assessment and monitoring, as
well as to improve the experience of using speech recognition
technology for people who stutter [1, 2, 3]. The goal of stuttering
detection/classification systems is to detect stuttering dysfluen-
cies in speech recordings and classify them into dysfluency types
(blocks, prolongations, repetitions, etc.) Stuttering classification
can be performed at the clip level, where the goal is to determine
the presence or absence of a dysfluency type in an audio clip,
or at the frame level, where the goal is to determine the exact
timestamps of the dysfluencies.
Several stuttered speech datasets in various languages have
been created to support these efforts. Some of these datasets
are annotated with dysfluency timestamps [4, 5], but most are
annotated at the clip level, where the exact timestamps of the
dysfluencies within the clips are unknown [ 6, 7, 8]. The clip-
level labeling method is considered to be more practical as it can
be applied by non-expert annotators and allows them to label a
large amount of data more quickly [7]. However, when assessing
the intensity of stuttering in a clinical setting, the exact duration
of dysfluencies is important. Some of the standardized stuttering
severity assessment instruments like the SSI-4 [9] and the speech
efficiency score (SES) [10] require the duration of dysfluencies
to be known. Labeling the stuttering events in the form of fixed-
length clips, while practical, neglects this important information.
Due to the limited availability of frame-level annotations,
stuttering classification methods most often focus on clip-level
classification, which is treated as a multi-label classification task
due to the fact that more than one stuttering dysfluency may be
present within a clip [11]. Recent methods often rely on founda-
tion speech encoders like wav2vec 2.0 [11, 12, 13, 14], Whisper
[15, 16] or WavLM [17]. To obtain a clip-level classification
decision, the temporal dimension of the encoder output is re-
duced using mean pooling [12, 13] or dot-product attention [11]
before feeding the hidden representations into the classification
head. Other classification methods, utilizing hand-engineered
spectral features (e.g., spectrograms, MFCC, pitch) with classi-
fier models such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [18, 19]
or random forest (RF) [5, 20], are also represented.
Frame-level stuttering classification methods, although less
common, have also been developed. YOLO-Stutter [ 21] is a
multimodal speech/text model trained on an artificially created
stuttering dataset, which performs multi-class frame-level stutter-
ing classification by formulating the task as a YOLO-like object
detection problem. StutterCut [22] is a graph clustering method
aided by a Whisper-based clip-level classifier, which performs
frame-level stuttering segmentation by clustering the frames of a
clip into fluent and dysfluent clusters. Harvill et al. [23] and Shih
et al. [ 17] perform binary frame-level stuttering classification
by pre-training a classifier on synthetic dysfluencies and then
fine-tuning on a clip-level dataset using the multiple-instance
learning (MIL) paradigm.
We improve upon current state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods
in both clip-level and frame-level stuttering classification by
generalizing the existing MIL-based methods to the multi-label
classification setting, and by applying the attention-based em-
bedding MIL approach to this task for the first time to further
improve frame-level performance. Unlike previous methods, our
method does not require pre-training on frame-based datasets
and is capable of zero-shot frame-level classification while only
being trained on clip-level datasets. Our contributions are:
1. A multiple-instance neural network (MINN) model architec-
ture achieving SOTA clip-level multi-label stuttering classifi-
cation results on the SEP-28k-E dataset,
2. Achieving SOTA frame-level stuttering classification perfor-
mance on the CASA annotations of the FluencyBank dataset.
2. Method
2.1. Multiple instance learning
Frame-level stuttering classification can be learned from clip-
level data by formulating the clip-level stuttering classification
task as a weakly-supervised MIL task. Under this formulation,
each audio clip is divided into a number of frames. In the context
of MIL, a frame represents an instance, and a clip is a collection
2024
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1091
of frames called a bag of instances. Under the standard MIL
assumption [24], the label of the bag is known, but the labels of
individual instances are unknown. If any instance within a bag
has a positive label, then the label of the bag will also be positive.
If all of the instance labels within a bag are negative, then the
bag label will also be negative. In the context of multi-label
stuttering classification, a clip is labeled with a dysfluency label
if at least one of its frames contains the dysfluency.
Deep neural networks can be applied to MIL tasks using
one of two methods: the instance-based and the embedding-
based approach [25]. When the instance-based approach is used,
the network outputs a label probability for each instance. The
instance-level probabilities are aggregated into a bag-level prob-
ability using a MIL pooling function. The max, mean or the
log-sum-exp functions are commonly used for this purpose [25].
In this case, the instance scores provide interpretability to the
bag-level classification decision - instances with a high positive
class probability contribute towards a positive classification deci-
sion. On the other hand, the embedding-based approach maps a
collection of instances to a bag embedding, which is then used to
infer a bag-level label. This approach is considered to result in
better bag classification performance [25], however it lacks the
interpretability of the instance-based approach. The attention-
based MIL pooling operator [26] was introduced to bridge the
two approaches. It allows a model to learn an adaptive pooling
function which corresponds to a version of the attention mech-
anism. The attention weights of the operator have been shown
to identify key instances that contribute to a positive bag-level
classification in embedding-based MIL models [26].
Existing MIL methods of stuttering classification utilize the
instance-based approach and apply max pooling to aggregate
instance-level predictions into a bag-level prediction [ 17, 23].
The attention pooling embedding-based approach has not yet
been applied to stuttering classification, but it has been applied to
analyze the physiological signals of children who stutter to inves-
tigate which signal features could be used to identify stuttering
events [27].
2.2. Model architecture
We use two MINN models in our experiments: an instance-
based model utilizing max-pooling and an embedding-based
model utilizing MIL attention pooling. Their architecture is
shown in Figure 1. The first stage of both models is a pre-
trained foundation encoder. Drawing inspiration from pre-
vious work, we tested wav2vec 2.0 [ 28], Whisper [ 29] and
WavLM [30] encoders and based our models on their pretrained
checkpoints: wav2vec2-large, whisper-medium, and
wavlm-large, respectively. The checkpoints were chosen
due to their comparable number of parameters (wav2vec 2.0:
315M, WavLM: 315M, Whisper: 307M) and embedding size
(1024). Following the approach by Shih et al. [17], we use the
HConv interface [31] to pool the outputs of multiple encoder
layers. The convolutional feature extractors of the encoders
produceT frame-level representations of the input clip. The
duration of a frame is 20 ms for all three foundation encoders
(T = 150 frames per 3-second input clip). The essence of our
MIL approach is to structure the rest of the network in a way
that preserves the temporal dimension and allows the network to
learn frame-level labels. The outputs of the encoder are passed
through a bidirectional LSTM network consisting of 4 layers of
512 units. The LSTM acts as a smoothing layer for the frame-
level outputs, ensuring temporal consistency between frames
which leads to improved frame-level performance. The LSTM
outputs are further passed through a projector consisting of 2 lay-
ers of 256 and 128 fully connected neurons with a leaky ReLU
non-linearity.
For the instance-based model, the output of the projector is
passed through an instance-based multi-label classification head
with a sigmoid activation. The instance-based classifier returns a
multi-label vector of classification probabilies for each instance.
To obtain the clip-level classification result, the maximum value
of the instance probabilities for each label is selected. When
using the instance-based model for frame-level segmentation,
the max-pooling layer is removed and a thresholdθ is applied to
the outputs of the instance-based classifier.
For the embedding-based model, the output of the projector
is passed through a MIL attention layer. We follow the MIL
attention operator structure introduced by Ilse et al. [26], which
is implemented by two fully-connected layers of 128 andT neu-
rons, along with a tanh nonlinearity and a softmax function. The
produced attention weights are of sizeT . The bag representation
created by applying the attention-pooling operator is passed to
a multi-label classification head. When performing frame-level
segmentation inference, if the clip is labeled as negative, then
all of the frames of the clip are considered to be negative. If the
clip is labeled as positive, the unnormalized attention weights
(before applying the softmax function) are used for frame-level
classification by applying the sigmoid activation function and
a thresholdθ. The rationale behind using the attention weight
values before applying the softmax function is to prevent the
influence of the duration of a dysfluent region on the weight
values. Since the softmax function makes the weights sum to
1, the individual normalized weight values would be lower if
the total sum of the unnormalized weights were greater due to a
prolonged dysfluency. An example of computed instance prob-
abilities and attention weights for a stuttered speech sample is
shown in Figure 2.
2.3. Loss function
The models are trained using the binary cross-entropy (BCE)
loss function, taking the mean loss value across labels for multi-
label models. To handle class imbalance, we apply a weighting
factor to the positive samples for each label:
w+
l = N−
l
N +
l
, (1)
wherel is the label, andN−
l andN +
l are the number of negative
and positive samples for labell, respectively. In addition, we ap-
ply a per-sample weighting factor based on annotator agreement
on the No stuttered wordslabel. The labels are described in more
detail in section 3.1. Each sample is labeled by 3 annotators.
Samples that are not unanimously agreed on are weighted with a
factor of 0.25:
wi =
(
1 NS (i)∈{ 0, 3}
0.25 NS (i)∈{ 1, 2} (2)
where NS (i) is the number of annotator votes for the No stut-
tered words label of thei-th batch sample. The annotator agree-
ment weights are further normalized per batch so that the mean
weight across the batch is equal to 1:
wi,norm = BPB
j=1wj
wi (3)
whereB is the batch size.
2025
N
Foundation
Encoder
Projector Classifier
Max pooling
3-second audio
Sigmoid
Clip-level predictions
L x T x H
HConv
T x D1
T x D2
T x N
T x N
Frame-level predictions
LSTM
T x H
(a) Instance-based model
N
D2
MIL attention
Classifier
Clip-level predictions
Sigmoid
Foundation
Encoder
Projector
3-second audio
L x T x H
HConv
T x D1
T x D2
LSTM
T x H N
Sigmoid
Attention
weights
T
T
T
Attention weights (b) Embedding-based model
Figure 1: Architecture of the proposed MINN models. The tensor dimensions are:L = number of encoder layers,T = number of frames
(temporal dimension),H = encoder embedding size,D1,D 2 = LSTM/projector embedding size,N = number of labels
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
Frame index
0
2000
4000
6000
8000Frequency (Hz)
The appropro pro proach is that you...
(a) Spectrogram and transcription of a stuttered speech sample
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
Frame index
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00Value
Instance scores
Attention weights
(b) Instance-based model’s instance scores (solid blue) and embedding-
based model’s attention weights (dashed red). The attention weights are
rescaled as a′
i = (ai − min(a))/(max(a) − min(a))
Figure 2: Spectrogram and single-label frame-level model out-
puts for a clip from the SEP-28k-E test set. Both models used
the Whisper encoder
3. Experiments
3.1. Data
We train our models on the standardized SEP-28k-E split of the
clip-level SEP-28k dataset [32]. The dataset contains 28,000 3-
second clips labeled with the following dysfluency labels: Block,
Prolongation, Sound repetition, Word repetition, Interjection,
and No stuttered words. Each sample was labeled by 3 annotators.
We consider a label positive if at least 2 annotators voted for
the label. We invert the No stuttered words label to comply
with the MIL assumption (a positive label means a dysfluency
is present). To evaluate cross-dataset performance and compare
with the current SOTA MINN model [17], we also report clip-
level performance on the clip-level labels of the FluencyBank
dataset [6], comprised of 4,144 clips annotated using the same
labels as the SEP-28k. Since the baseline model is a single-label
binary classifier, for this purpose we train a single-label classifier
using only the inverted No stuttered words label.
Frame-level performance is evaluated on the timestamped
CASA annotations [4] of the FluencyBank dataset. These anno-
tations consist of core (vocal) and secondary (visual) behaviors,
marked by 3 annotators. The core labels are: Syllable repeti-
tion, Incomplete syllable repetition , Multisyllable unit repeti-
tion, Sound prolongation, and Block. We evaluate on the ”gold
standard” consensus test set containing 8 recordings of variable
length with a total of 732 dysfluencies [4]. Due to the differences
in labels between SEP-28k and CASA, only the single-label per-
formance is evaluated by aggregating the primary dysfluency
labels of the CASA dataset. The recordings are divided into
3-second clips with no overlap to be used as the input of our
models. The clips are segmented into 20 ms frames and frame
labels are created based on the dysfluency timestamps.
3.2. Setup
For our training, we use the Adam optimizer with an initial
learning rate of 5× 10−5 and a batch size of 16. First, the
foundation encoder is frozen and the model is trained until the
development set loss stops decreasing for 3 epochs. Then, the
foundation encoder is unfrozen and fine-tuned with an initial
learning rate of 1× 10−5 until the development set loss stops
decreasing again. The model with the lowest development set
loss across all training epochs is evaluated on the test set. For
the clip-level task, we apply a threshold of θ = 0 .5 to the
classifier output. For the frame-level task, we compare the labels
to the outputs of the instance-based max-pooling classifier or
the unnormalized attention weights of the embedding-based
classifier, with a thresholdθ = 0.5 in both cases.
3.3. Results
The clip-level multi-label classification results are reported in
Table 1. We compare our results with two baselines that achieved
SOTA multi-label classification results on the SEP-28k-E split
2026
Table 1: Clip-level multi-label F1 scores on the SEP-28k-E test
set (Bl: Block, Pro: Prolongation, Snd: Sound repetition, Wd:
Word repetition, Int: Interjection, NS: No stuttered words)
Model Bl Pro Snd Wd Int NS
Miyahara et al. [13] 0.30 0.53 0.46 0.67 0.78 0.82
Haas et al. [33] 0.33 0.51 0.53 0.71 0.77 -
wav2vec 2.0 + max. pool 0.30 0.25 0.46 0.34 0.40 0.70
wav2vec 2.0 + attn. pool 0.31 0.39 0.44 0.41 0.71 0.69
WavLM + max. pool 0.34 0.31 0.51 0.72 0.83 0.78
WavLM + attn. pool 0.35 0.47 0.42 0.74 0.82 0.78
Whisper + max. pool 0.35 0.50 0.53 0.80 0.74 0.78
Whisper + attn. pool 0.35 0.49 0.53 0.78 0.82 0.78
Table 2: Clip-level single-label results on the FluencyBank
dataset
Model F1 Precision Recall
Shih et al. [17] 0.85 - -
wav2vec 2.0 + max. pool 0.74 0.75 0.72
wav2vec 2.0 + attn. pool 0.77 0.86 0.70
WavLM + max. pool 0.88 0.88 0.89
WavLM + attn. pool 0.89 0.89 0.88
Whisper + max. pool 0.89 0.86 0.92
Whisper + attn. pool 0.90 0.91 0.89
without any samples being excluded from the dataset: a VGG-19
classifier on self-attention weights of wav2vec 2.0 features by
Miyahara et al. [13] and a wav2vec 2.0-based model trained on
multilingual data by Haas et al. [ 33]. The clip-level results of
our single-label models on the FluencyBank dataset, compared
to the current SOTA instance-based MINN model utilizing a
WavLM encoder with max-pooling [17], are shown in Table 2.
The baseline scores are quoted directly from their papers.
We compare the frame-level performance of our models on
the CASA dataset to YOLO-Stutter [ 21] and StutterCut [ 22],
the SOTA stuttering segmentation methods. For YOLO-Stutter,
we obtain audio transcriptions with WhisperX [34] and use the
inference code provided by the authors. For StutterCut, we
use our own implementation. We evaluate our WavLM- and
Whisper-based models due to their superior performance to the
wav2vec 2.0-based models on the clip-level task. We calculate
the frame-level F1 score, precision and recall for each recording,
and report the average across all recordings in Table 3.
4. Discussion
Our WavLM- and Whisper-based models achieve SOTA results
in the clip-level detection of blocks, sound repetitions, word
repetitions and interjections. Our results fall slightly short of
the baselines for prolongations and the general dysfluent label.
The improvement in results might depend most on the archi-
tecture of the foundational encoders, considering our wav2vec
2.0-based models underperform the other variants. Our models
also achieved an improvement on the cross-dataset single-label
classification task when compared to the baseline instance-based
MIL model. Here, the baseline model used the same WavLM
encoder as some of our models, but its weights were frozen dur-
ing training, so we attribute our improvement to the fine-tuning
stage, which reduced the need for pretraining on artificial stut-
tering. Our attention-based embedding approach resulted in a
slight improvement over instance-based models on this dataset,
Table 3: Frame-level single-label results on the ”gold standard”
test set of the CASA dataset
Model F1 Precision Recall
YOLO-Stutter [21] 0.47 0.47 0.49
StutterCut [22] 0.45 0.39 0.58
WavLM + max. pool 0.46 0.53 0.41
WavLM + attn. pool 0.56 0.53 0.59
Whisper + max. pool 0.66 0.76 0.59
Whisper + attn. pool 0.70 0.71 0.69
demonstrating its usefulness on the clip-level task.
Our frame-level results indicate a substantial frame-level F1
improvement compared to the baselines. However, it should be
noted that the baseline methods assume every input clip contains
a dysfluency, which is not the case in our evaluation on whole
speech recordings, resulting in some false positives. Unlike the
baselines, our models do not require any prior knowledge of
the presence of dysfluencies, making them more suitable for
end-to-end processing. Both Whisper and WavLM embedding-
based models achieved a higher F1 score than instance-based
ones and showed improved recall, which is especially important
in clinical diagnostic tasks. This result further demonstrates the
effectiveness of the embedding-based approach on this task over
existing instance-based methods. Through manual examination
of the frame-level predictions, we have noticed that our mod-
els sometimes struggle with long-lasting blocks. This is likely
caused by the fact that the models can only make predictions
based on a 3-second context window, which might lack the nec-
essary acoustic evidence in the case of blocks that span multiple
window lengths. Longer context windows might be necessary to
further improve the performance on this type of dysfluency.
5. Conclusion
Our work investigates the application of the weakly-supervised
multiple instance learning paradigm to the task of stuttering
classification, being the first to explore MIL for multi-label
stuttering classification, as well as the application of attention-
pooling embedding-based MINNs to this task. We discover that
instance-based and embedding-based MINN classifiers, taking
advantage of speech foundation encoders, can be effectively used
for clip-level multi-label stuttering classification. Additionally,
the advantage of MINN models over the current SOTA clip-level
classifiers is a level of interpretability that could prove useful
in clinical applications. Our models achieve multi-label classi-
fication results comparable to SOTA models on the SEP-28k-
E dataset. The same models demonstrate SOTA performance
on frame-level stuttered speech segmentation. The embedding-
based MIL approach has proved to be a viable option for utiliz-
ing datasets with clip-level labels to train models for this task,
demonstrating superior performance over the current best seg-
mentation methods. To further improve the frame-level perfor-
mance, pre-training or fine-tuning on a frame-level dataset might
be useful, as demonstrated by some previous studies [ 17, 23].
Multi-label frame-level segmentation performance should also
be evaluated in future studies. Our results show that the MIL
paradigm could be a promising approach towards clinically ap-
plicable stuttering assessment algorithms by allowing existing
clip-level datasets to be used for training frame-level classifiers,
which are necessary for the automated assessment of stuttering
severity with standardized instruments.
2027
6. Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the European Union-
NextGenerationEU project NPOO 581-16956 VISTAHealth.
Computing resources were provided by the University of Zagreb
Computing Centre (SRCE) through the Advanced Computing
service.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools (Claude Sonnet 4.6) were used to assist with
grammar and spelling, with all changes reviewed and approved
by the authors.