Segmental Attention Decoding With Long Form Acoustic Encodings
Pawel Swietojanski1, Xinwei Li1, Mingbin Xu1, Takaaki Hori1, Dogan Can1, Xiaodan Zhuang1
1Apple, USA
{pswietojanski, xinwei li2}@apple.com
Abstract
We address the fundamental incompatibility of attention-
based encoder-decoder (AED) models with long-form acoustic
encodings. AED trained on segmented utterances learn to en-
code absolute positions by exploiting limited acoustic context
beyond segment boundaries, but fail to generalize when decod-
ing long-form segments where these cues vanish. The model
loses ability to order acoustic encodings due to permutation in-
variance of keys and values in cross-attention. We propose four
modifications: 1) injecting explicit absolute positional encod-
ings into cross-attention, 2) long-form training with extended
acoustic context to eliminate implicit absolute position encod-
ing, 3) segment concatenation to cover diverse segmentations
needed during training, 4) semantic segmentation to align AED-
decoded segments with training segments. We show that these
modifications close the accuracy gap between continuous and
segmented acoustic encodings, enabling auto-regressive use of
the attention decoder.
Index Terms: attention decoder, long form ASR
1. Introduction and Related Work
Attention encoder decoder (AED) models [1, 2] make a pop-
ular family of end-to-end speech recognition models offering
powerful auto-regressive capabilities, though long-form (LF)
ASR with AED models remains a challenge [3–5]. Current
approaches typically rely on external segmentation systems or
different windowing techniques [6–8] that artificially recreate
boundary conditions. As such, attention decoder (AD) is often
used in multi-pass settings instead where the first pass hypothe-
ses are refined by AD [9,10]. Such rescoring, however, operates
on n-best lists or discrete tokens, rather than full auto-regressive
decoding limiting potential accuracy gains. Most recent ef-
forts related to LF ASR focus on transformer encoders with lin-
earized attention [11, 12], or alternative architectures [13]. [14]
recently proposed long-form (LF) training, and evaluated differ-
ent flavours of linear-time encoders on LF tasks. In this work we
are interested in the AD inability to use LF encodings in auto-
regressive manner. Issues with AD on LF data were identified
before [4], though not addressed to date to our knowledge.
Our contributions are fourfold: (1) We identify the permu-
tation invariance problem in attention-based ASR for LF audio,
demonstrating how short-form boundary effects hide this limita-
tion during training. (2) To tackle (1), we propose modifications
including cross-attention positional encodings and LF training.
(3) We demonstrate that our approach achieves parity between
segmented and long-form performance while maintaining com-
petitive results against similarly-sized models. (4) Extend the
model with first pass semantic segmentation capabilities, show-
ing it outperforms voice-activity-detection (V AD).
Acoustic 
Encoder
… …
segment S
…
Attention 
Decoder
Right 
Acoustic 
Context
Left 
Acoustic 
Context
hs
tb
hs
teh1
Acoustic 
features
Acoustic 
encodings
Cmax
L Cmax
R
hT
Figure 1:Illustration of LFE, left/right acoustic context and
boundary conditions. Shaded areas denote regions crucial to
LFE, absent during training and inference on segmented data.
2. Definitions
2.1. Attention-based Encoder-Decoder Model
The AED model converts speech audio to text using three main
parts: an acoustic encoder, a cross-attention mechanism, and an
autoregressive decoder [1, 2].
Acoustic Encoder:The encoderH=E θ(X)takes a se-
quence of acoustic featuresX= (x 1, ..., xT ′ )and converts
them into sequence of acoustic encodingsH= (h 1, ..., hT ),
withT≤T ′. Modern encoders use conformer [15,16] or trans-
former [17, 18] blocks with convolutional downsampling.
Attention Decoder:The decodery u =D θ(yu−1,C<u,H)
produces output tokensY= (y 1, ..., yU )auto-regressively one
token at a time. At each stepu, the decoder combines three
pieces of information: the previous token embeddingy u−1, its
previous internal stateC<u up tou, and acoustic encodingsH.
Cross-Attention Mechanism:D θ interacts with encoder
Eθ via cross-attention [17] layers. In AED, dot-product cross-
attention queries come from decoder statesC, while the keys
and values are derived from the acoustic encodingsH.
2.2. Long-Form Acoustic Encodings
In this work, we investigate the relationship between the recep-
tive field of the transformer-based encoderEθ and the ability of
the attention decoderD θ to transcribe any segmentH s∈H,
for encodingsHcomputed from an audio streamX. Contrary
to recurrent neural networks, the transformer architecture en-
ables precise control of the neighbourhood information at each
step. For example, acoustic encoding at timet,h t =E θ(X)t,
may be derived from an arbitrary subset of features inX, as de-
7184
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-341
fined by the structure of the maskMused in the self-attention
layers ofE θ. Definitions 1 and 2 specify the notions of long-
form acoustic encoding, and long-form segment as relevant for
this work:
Definition 1(Long-Form Acoustic Encoding (LFE)).An
acoustic encodinght is an LFE when it satisfies:
ht =E θ(X)t withC L(t) =C max
L , C R(t) =C max
R
whereC max
L andC max
R denote the maximum left/right context
supported by the encoderEθ when processing inputsX.
Definition 2(Long-form segment).A segmentsis considered
long-form if each encodinghs
t∈H s is an LFE encoding.
In other words, the encodingh t becomes LFE when computed
with the full bidirectional context defined by the masking strat-
egy ofEθ. Fig. 1 illustrates the crucial difference between short-
form encodings (SFE) and LFE for any segmentS, and its cor-
responding acoustic encodingsH s = (hs
tb , ...., hs
te ). In partic-
ular, for segmented utterances (without shaded regions)CL(tb)
ofhs
tb andCR(te)ofh s
te is0. In contrast, for LFE (with shaded
regions)C L(tb) =C max
L andC R(te) =C max
R . Global atten-
tion makes a special case, as any encoding at any time can be an-
chored relative to the recording’s edge encodings (h 1 andh T ),
thus mitigating the LF AD issue. Global attention, however, is
not always practical as i) the encoder may be expected to be
streaming, and more importantly, ii) global attention for speech
is known to be sensitive to duration mismatch between train-
ing and inference conditions [19, 20], an issue that is likely to
only be exacerbated in long-form scenarios with ever-growing
left-context. In general, it is not straightforward to eliminate the
short/long form mismatch for arbitrary length sequences, as the
length of training utterances is usually more constrained than
the length of unsegmented audio streams during inference.
In this work, we keep the left and right contexts ofEθ fixed
to a number of look-back and look-ahead conformer frames,
similar to [18], ensuring robust estimation within this regime.
Under this formulation, the expected context to obtain LFE
depends on the finite number ofN”look-back” frames each
self-attention layer sees in the preceding layer, the number
of transformer layersLand decimation factorR:C max
L =
L·N·Racoustic frames. For the right context, we use causal
chunks [21] as a good trade-off between latency, accuracy and
hardware utilization, thusC max
R =M·R, whereMis the maxi-
mum number of frames within the chunk that self-attention lay-
ers can look at in the future. Additionally, similar to [22] we
train models with several chunk sizes so the latency/accuracy
trade-off can be configured during inference. This context lim-
ited architecture works well in long-form applications.
3. Proposed Modifications
3.1. Explicit Positional Encodings in Cross Attention
The fundamental property of dot-product cross-attention is its
permutation invariance [17]. Given any ordering of inputsH,
attention produces the same output, meaning it cannot distin-
guish between different acoustic orderings based solely on con-
tent, unless content itself encodes sequential order.
This property becomes problematic for continuous long
form acoustic streams as AED is typically trained on segmented
utterances where attention can implicitly learn to exploit edge
effects as positional anchors where acoustic encodings at seg-
ment boundaries lack full bidirectional context (cf.Fig. 1, with-
out shaded areas). This creates distinctive patterns that help
the decoder implicitly track the ordering ofH. However, when
the encoder processes enough acoustic signal as is the case
in the long-form scenario (cf.Fig 1 with shaded areas), these
edge cues vanish and all embeddings appear contextually simi-
lar, causing the issues with positional tracking. This limitation
manifests as repeated transcription outputs and an inability of
AD to emit end-of-sentence (EOS) tokens.
To address permutation invariance, we add an absolute po-
sitional codespto each segmentH s,i.e.H s
p =H s +p. This is
on top of the usual positional information injected at the encoder
inputs [17, 23], as we also explicitly incorporate those at the
LFE levelH, before they are fed into cross-attention keys and
values. This ensures attention weights reflect temporal position,
while positional information specific to segmentspropagates
to the decoder. Crucially, position indices are reset for each de-
coded segment rather than maintaining global positions, provid-
ing sufficient temporal grounding without unbounded growth.
3.2. Data-level transformations
Typically ASR is trained using segmented data, allowing mod-
els to (unintentionally) exploit boundary effects that may be-
come absent in long-form scenarios (see Section 2.2). To en-
courage the model to leverage explicit signals for acoustic or-
dering using PE codes (Section 3.1) rather than relying on these
artifacts, we propose a long-form training approach exposing
AD to long-form segments (Definition 2). This differs from
other data-level long-form training regimes [14,24], as we teach
AD to specifically decode LFE segmentsH s in a long stream
of audio encodingsH.
Expanding acoustic context (AC):During training with
a pair{Y s,X s}, we expand the acoustic encodings toX s
E =
[Xs
L,X s,X s
R]for randomly selected LF examples to include
necessary left/right acoustic contexts for a valid LF segmentHs
(Definition 2). Lack of edge encodings encourages AD to iden-
tify alternative information sources for understanding acoustic
encoding order when computing cross-attention, moving be-
yond reliance on segment boundaries. For AED loss compu-
tation and cross-attention, we only use the valid subset of ex-
pandedH s
E relevant forY s, discarding leftH s
L and rightH s
R
encodings computed forX s
L andX s
R, respectively (see shaded
regions of Fig. 1).
Segment concatenation (SC):LF acoustic recordings al-
low us concatenate arbitrary numbers of consecutive segments,
including their corresponding contiguous acoustic featuresX
(with all non-speech audio in the neighbourhood of concate-
nated segments). We found this to improve AD by i) exposing
attention to more diverse segment durations and ii) exposing
AD to more LFE encodings. Similar approach has been ex-
plored before [14,25]. SC differs from AC as the latter removes
boundary conditions while the former varies training segment
lengths, and both can be applied jointly.
Semantic segmentation (SS):In the spirit of using CTC to
aid attention decoding [8,26], and to tie segmentations with de-
coding [27] we explicitly use CTC head to model segmentation
tokens segE. These are used to indicate boundaries of seman-
tically coherent sentences, as opposed to relying on audio-only
V AD. This tag, when emitted by CTC, is used to determine seg-
mentsHs for which to run second pass AD. Note that the ability
of AD to decode arbitrary subsets of LFEHs∈His one of the
main contributions of this work, without which one would need
to recompute the encodingsHs to introduce boundary cues (see
Sections 3.1 and 4.1 to see why). We append segmentation tags
for training transcripts using theSegment any Textmodel [28].
7185
4. Experiments
All models in this work are based on the CTC-AED archi-
tecture [29]. It offers appealing deployment flexibility, from
streaming to offline or two pass systems. We train two model
sizes, referred to asOurs.baseandOurs.smallwith approxi-
mately 90M and 240M parameters, respectively. Both mod-
els share the sameR= 6times convolutional downsam-
pling frontend and attention decoderDθ architecture composed
of 3 unidirectional transformer blocks totalling 18M param-
eters. Acoustic encodersE θ are based on causal Conformer
blocks [15]1 and have 70M and 219M paremters, respectively.
Both share 512 dimensionality and 8 attention heads, with dif-
ferent numbers of blocks and feed-forward (FF) dimensions.
Ours.basehas 12 blocks with 2048 FF units, whileOurs.small
has 28 blocks and 3072 FF dimension. While architectures like
Whisper [6] distribute parameters equally between encoder and
decoder, we scaled the encoder and kept the decoder fixed at
18M params. This allows an efficient decoder for on-device
auto-regressive decoding, and a more powerful encoder that bet-
ter leverages neural accelerators. AD and CTC heads model a
distribution over the same 6081 byte-pair subword units [30].
We train our models using a mixture of publicly avail-
able data using Adam optimizer for 300k updates, each up-
date using 6144 sentences with an average length of 33 sec-
onds. The training data is composed of English corpora acces-
sible through LDC 2, SpeechOcean, LibriHeavy [31] but also
a large-scale LF conversational audio dataset collected from
publicly accessible sources, referred to as SpeechCrawl [32].
SpeechCrawl uses pseudo-labels generated using an ensem-
ble of open-source [6, 16] and in-house models, followed by
ROVER committee voting [33]. Not all datasets have long form
contiguous acoustic recordings, as such long-form transforma-
tions (Section 3.2) are applied on LibriHeavy, SpeechCrawl and
SpeechOcean. We report our results on public benchmarks in-
cludingTedlium3[34] andEarnings21[35] for LF andCom-
monVoice[36],Librispeech[37] for SF decodes, respectively.
4.1. Results
Table 1 presents a systematic study demonstrating the impact
of each proposed modification for fixing AD issues on LFE in-
troduced in Section 2. We report results for the three decoding
modes - attention rescoring [9] (Resc), Attention [1] (Att) and
joint ctc-attention [38] (CTC-Att). All three utilize AD in dif-
ferent ways, demonstrating varying behaviour when decoding
LF data. Unless stated otherwise, segmentations for SFE and
LFE are identical and derived from a stand-alone V AD system
for Models 0 - 4. The results show a stark contrast between
performance on SFE and LFE, highlighting the challenges of
applying AD to transcribe LF audio segments.
Baseline Performance (Model 0)The first block of Table 1
reports word error rates (WER) for the baseline AED model.
We can see that i) there is a significant accuracy gain when go-
ing from attention rescoring to autoregressive decoding (5.8%
to 4.9%) for SFE, and ii) going from SFE to LFE is also benefi-
cial for attention rescoring (5.8% to 5.4%, due to better quality
of first pass CTC hypotheses). However, there is a significant
degradation for LFE with attention or CTC attention decoders.
This demonstrates that vanilla AD trained on segmented data is
incompatible with LFE representations (Definition 1). Closer
investigation showed that the model struggled to emit EOS to-
1We use Layer Norm instead of Batch Norm, and RoPE encodings.
2https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/. We used Fisher, Callhome and ISCI
Table 1:Impact of proposed modifications on attention decod-
ing on short– and long-form acoustic encodings (AE). WER (%)
reported on TED-LIUM3 long-form test for Ours.base model.
Mdl AE Modifications WER (%)
SC AC PE SSAR AD CAT
0 SFE ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 5.8 5.1 4.9
LFE 5.4 295 14.5
1 SFE ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ 5.5 4.9 4.8
LFE 5.1 295 16.6
2 SFE ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ 5.6 4.9 4.8
LFE 5.1 40.3 8.4
3 SFE ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ 5.6 5.0 4.8
LFE 5.1 145 5.5
4 SFE ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ 5.5 4.9 4.7
LFE 5.1 5.0 4.5
5 LFE✓ ✓ ✓ ✓4.7 4.8 4.3
SC - Segment Concatenation, AC - Acoustic Context,
PE - Positional Encoding, SS - Semantic Segmentations
AR - Attention Rescoring, CAT - Joint CTC-Attention
ken, which resulted in re-decoding same chunks over and over
again causing excessive insertions (only limited by decoder set-
ting of max number of tokens).
Segment Concatenations (SC, Model 1)Segment con-
catenation is the first modification we introduce to increase AD
performance on LF data, by training it on longer multi-segment
utterances (up to 2 minute 30 seconds in this work). We can see
this approach decreases general WER across the board for all
decoding modes for SFE, though does not solve the crucial AD
failure for LFE segments,i.e.the segments with no boundary
cues preserved (Definition 2).
Impact of Acoustic Context (AC, Model 2)Introducing
acoustic context during training maintains segmented perfor-
mance while mitigating the baseline’s difficulties on LFE, re-
ducing WER from 295% to 40.3%, still a large performance
gap when compared to SFE. The extended AC encourages the
model to rely less on boundary cues and more on the exist-
ing relative positional information present in acoustic embed-
dings via the existing input RoPE [23] positional encodings. For
Ours.basemodel,L= 12, N= 16, M= 16andR= 6, so
C max
L = 1152andC max
R = 96acoustic frames. To obtain
LFE, we append thus 11.52s and 0.96s seconds of left and right
context, respectively (see also Section 2.2).
Positional Encoding Effects (PE, Model 3)Adding aux-
iliary absolute positional encodings toH s (Model 3) shows
modest improvements, roughly halving long-form AD WER to
145% compared to Model 1. Although less effective than acous-
tic context, positional encoding should provide essential tempo-
ral structure information that helps AD make sense of sequence
ordering in long-form audio. Interestingly, appending these is
not sufficient for the model to fully leverage them, likely due to
boundary cues in segmented training data being an easier short-
cut to learning temporal ordering. Note, however, that these
auxiliary position codes do improve over existing Rope encod-
ings already present in the inputs (cf.Model 1).
While the results for attention-only decoding for Model 3
suggest that AC expansion (Model 2) produces larger WER re-
ductions than segmental PE codes (Model 3), a deeper analy-
sis reveals more nuanced differences between these approaches.
7186
Table 2:WER results for the best systems. Results both on segmented and long-form public benchmarks.
Model Decoder Chunk Size Segmented Long-form
(seconds) Lbs clean Lbs other CommonV . Tedlium3 Tedlium3 Earnings21
Whisper base.en [6] AD 30 4.1 9.6 17.5 4.6 4.6 12.5
Ours.base AR 0.96 2.3 5.9 16.3 4.8 4.7 13.4
Ours.base AD 0.96 2.2 5.5 14.1 4.8 4.8 13.3
Ours.base CAT 0.96 2.1 5.4 14.4 4.4 4.3 12.2
Ours.base CAT 3.84 1.9 4.9 13.7 4.3 4.3 12.1
Whisper small.en [6] AD 30 3.2 6.7 12.6 4.3 4.6 10.8
Ours.small AR 0.96 2.0 4.8 13.4 4.6 4.5 12.5
Ours.small AD 0.96 2.0 4.6 12.1 4.4 4.4 12.1
Ours.small CAT 0.96 1.8 4.4 12.4 4.1 4.0 11.4
Ours.small CAT 3.84 1.7 3.9 11.4 3.9 3.9 11.4
AD - Attention Decoding, AR - Attention Rescoring, CAT - Joint CTC-Attention
Positional codes (Model 3) enable the attention mechanism
to decode more coherent and longer sentences, but the model
struggled to emit EOS tokens. In contrast, acoustic expansion
(Model 2) generated EOS tokens more frequently, though at the
cost of increased deletion errors.
These findings suggest that Model 3 could achieve superior
overall performance if provided with better guidance on when
to stop decoding. We tested this hypothesis using jointCTC-
Attentiondecoding [38], with results shown in the last column
of Table 1. When guided by CTC, attention decoding with aux-
iliary positional codes (Model 3) demonstrates better accuracy
than the model with expanded acoustic context during training
(Model 2), 5.5% vs 8.4% WER, respectively.
Combined Context and Positional Encoding (Model 4)
The combination of acoustic context and positional encoding
(Model 4), though, yields significant improvements, achieving
parity on long-form audio w/ AD between SFE and LFE en-
codings. This result suggests that both spatial (acoustic con-
text) and temporal (positional encoding) information are com-
plementary and necessary for long-form attention decoding, and
that exposing the model to more data without boundary cues
during training encourages it to rely more on auxiliary posi-
tional encodings. This result also demonstrates that explicit PE
information added toH s is important (compare Table 1Attde-
code results of Models 4 and 2).
Complete System with all modifications (Model 5)
Model 5 demonstrates that using first-pass CTC semantic seg-
mentation tokens to trigger attention decoding consistently out-
performs V AD-based approaches. This improvement is ex-
pected since the attention decoder is trained primarily on cor-
rectly segmented utterances, while V AD may introduce non-
semantic boundaries that create inference mismatches. In our
long-form experiments, these V AD inconsistencies typically re-
sulted in increased deletion errors.
The CTC-attention hybrid decoder achieves the best over-
all performance across all decoding modes. Notably, Model 5
operates naturally in the LFE space, with Model 4 serving as
its corresponding SFE baseline when using V AD segmentation.
Similar performance trends were observed on the Earnings-21
long-form test set, though these results are not reported here.
4.2. Final results
Table 2 demonstrates that our proposed system achieves strong
performance across both segmented and long-form evaluation
datasets. Importantly, the adaptations made to enable effective
long-form processing do not degrade performance on standard
segmented audio, indicating our architectural modifications are
robust to different types of segmentations.
Parameter-wise our models deliver comparable perfor-
mance to similarly-sized Whisper variants, while doing so at
lower latency. Our model matches Whisper base.en perfor-
mance on long-form datasets while improving on segmented
tasks, and our small model consistently outperforms Whis-
per small.en across most benchmarks. Note thatLibrispeech
lbs clean,lbs otherandCommonVoiceare zero shot for Whis-
per, but not for our systems, which could explain better perfor-
mance of our models across these three benchmarks.
The use of CAT decoding provides additional practical ad-
vantages. This hybrid approach often yields the best perfor-
mance (e.g., 1.8% WER onlbs cleanvs. 2.0% with pure atten-
tion), while also enabling streaming first pass inference capabil-
ities, semantic segmentation tags for when to trigger AD, and
providing more robust decoding in challenging acoustic condi-
tions where attention-based decoding is prone to hallucinations.
Since our model was trained with variable masking at the en-
coder level, we can configure the model’s chunk size to a larger
value. We report these results in Table 2 for chunk size of 3.96s
for the best CAT decodes. The overall trend is WER gets further
reduced, as expected, but at higher latency cost.
5. Conclusions
We presented a set of modifications to train attention decoder
models so that they can process long-form acoustic encodings.
Through acoustic context expansion, auxiliary positional en-
coding, and long-form segment sampling and concatenation, the
attention decoder based system achieves transcription quality
of long-form acoustic encodings that is on par with decoding
of segmented encodings, enabling new ways to use attention
decoders. The hybrid CTC-attention system with first pass se-
mantic segmentation tags provides a low latency approach to
use AD two-pass architectu