Age-related Differences in the Perception of Vowel Length Contrast in
Northern Vietnamese: The Case of Hoang Van (Bac Ninh) Variety
Van Dat Ta ID 1,2, Baoya Chen ID 1,3
1 Department of Chinese Language and Literature, Peking University, China
2 Laboratory of Language Science, Peking University, China
3 Center for Chinese Linguistics, Peking University, China
tavandat@stu.pku.edu.cn, cbyhf@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
V owel length contrasts in Northern Vietnamese are acoustically
distinguished by both duration and spectral cues. This study
investigated the perception of long and short vowels in this lan-
guage and possible differences between older and younger lis-
teners. The results show that, at the group level, listeners in
both age groups relied primarily on vowel duration, with F1
and F2 serving as secondary cues. At the individual level, a
small subset of older listeners relied mainly on F1. Further-
more, acoustically incongruent stimuli (e.g., long-vowel dura-
tion integrated with short-vowel quality) elicited significantly
longer response times than congruent stimuli, without signifi-
cant age-related differences. These findings indicate that both
duration and spectral cues contribute to the perception of vowel
length in Northern Vietnamese, and the reliance on F1 as the
primary cue by some older listeners may indicate a possible on-
going sound change.
Index Terms: sound change, perception, cue weighting, vowel
length contrast, Northern Vietnamese
1. Introduction
Phonological contrasts usually rely on multiple acoustic and
perceptual cues, which differ in their relative contributions to
maintaining the contrast [1]. Previous studies have shown
that vowel length contrasts are primarily distinguished by du-
ration, with vowel quality and pitch serving as secondary
cues [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. In many languages, short vow-
els tend to be more centralized than their long counterparts
[9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], resulting in differences in
vowel quality between long and short vowels.
In Northern Vietnamese (NV), vowel length contrasts oc-
cur in closed syllables. Long and short vowels are distinguished
by both duration and spectral cues (mainly in vowel height and
backness, as reflected by F1 and F2). Because of spectral differ-
ences, some researchers have transcribed long and short vowels
using different symbols. For example, Emerich [18] used/a/
and/7/for long vowels, and/5/and/2/for their short coun-
terparts. Previous studies on NV have also shown that spectral
differences within the vowel length contrast are smaller than
duration differences [19, 20]. This suggests that in the produc-
tion of this multi-cue phonemic contrast, vowel duration carries
greater cue weight than vowel quality.
From a sociophonetic perspective, cross-linguistic research
has reported a reduction in vowel quality differences among
younger speakers in some languages. As a result, these speakers
rely more heavily on duration cue [4, 5, 6]. These studies adopt
the apparent-time approach [21, 22], which compares speakers
from different age groups to identify synchronic variation and
to trace ongoing sound change. As Ohala [23] noted, “sound
change is drawn from a pool of synchronic variation.” In other
words, sound change emerges from variation in the community,
which can be observed in both production and perception. In
particular, perceptual variation has been proposed as the initia-
tion of sound change [24, 25, 26]. For this reason, examining
age-related differences in perception can provide insight into
the mechanisms of sound change.
Some studies have examined the perception of long and
short vowels in NV [27, 28]. Nevertheless, these studies did not
investigate the relative contribution of different acoustic cues to
the perception of vowel length. It also remains unclear whether
age-related differences exist in the use of perceptual cues. Fur-
thermore, participants in previous studies were drawn from dif-
ferent speech communities, which may have introduced addi-
tional variability. To better understand the perceptual mecha-
nisms underlying vowel length contrasts in NV , and to test for
possible differences between younger and older listeners, it is
necessary to conduct a more controlled experiment. Such an
experiment should examine listeners from different age groups
within the same speech community.
The present study investigates the perception of/a(:)/in
NV . We focus on the Hoang Van variety, a rural variety of
Vietnamese spoken by approximately 52,900 native speakers
in Hoang Van commune, Bac Ninh province, Vietnam. This
monolingual speech community is located about 40 km north
of the country’s capital. In this study, we address the following
questions:
1. How do vowel duration and vowel quality (F1 and F2) con-
tribute to the perception of/a(:)/?
2. Do different integrations of vowel duration and vowel quality
influence response time?
3. Do younger and older listeners differ in how they perceive
the contrast?
2. Method
2.1. Participants
The experiment was conducted in Hoang Van commune, Bac
Ninh province, Vietnam. Data were collected from 41 native
speakers of NV living in the commune. The participants were
divided into a younger group (n = 20; 11 females; mean age =
24.00 years, SD = 7.20) and an older group (n = 21; 11 females;
mean age = 52.52 years, SD = 6.77). All participants and their
family members had no long-term experience of living or work-
ing outside the commune. None of the participants had received
formal training in linguistics or psychology. None reported any
speech or hearing disorders.
7373
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1167
Figure 1:Spectrogram and waveform of the two base sounds,
red speckles represent F1 and F2.
2.2. Stimuli
The base sounds/ta:t45/‘to slap’ and/tat45/‘to turn off’
were naturally produced by a 42-year-old male speaker. The
acoustic properties of the two base sounds are shown in Figure 1
and Table 1. A five-step duration continuum, a three-step F1
continuum, and a three-step F2 continuum were manipulated
using Praat v6.4.38 [29]. Formant manipulation was performed
using an LPC-based script developed by Winn [30]. The stimuli
were normalized for intensity (70 dB),f0, and VOT. Finally, 90
target stimuli were obtained (2 base sounds×5 duration×3 F1
×3 F2). In addition, 30 filler items were included, resulting in
120 stimuli in total. The fillers were taken from another project
and were included to maintain participants’ attention during the
experiment.
Table 1:The acoustic properties of the base sounds
Base Gloss Dur (ms) F1 (Hz) F2 (Hz)
/ta:t45/‘to slap’ 158 810 1510
/tat45/‘to turn off’ 120 760 1480
2.3. Procedure
The perception experiment employed a two-alternative forced-
choice (2AFC) identification task conducted on Gorilla [31].
Participants completed the experiment in their homes. Stim-
uli were presented through Sony MDR-7506 headphones. Each
stimulus was presented twice in random order, resulting in 240
trials per participant. On each trial, two pictures and their cor-
responding words were displayed on the screen. Each sound
was presented twice, with an inter-repetition interval of 500 ms.
After hearing both repetitions, participants were required to re-
spond within 5 seconds by pressing either the Q or P key, they
were given breaks after every 30 trials. The experiment took
approximately 30–40 minutes to complete for each participant.
Before the main experiment, participants completed a prac-
tice session using naturally produced stimuli (the base sounds
of the perception experiment). They were allowed to repeat the
practice until they were familiar with the procedure.
2.4. Statistical analysis
Trials with response times shorter than 100 ms or longer than
5000 ms were excluded, resulting in the removal of 54 tokens.
A mixed-effects logistic regression model was fitted to the
identification data from all speakers using theglmer()function
in thelme4R package [32, 33]. The response variable was the
identification response (long vs. short). Fixed effects included
Figure 2:The percentage of ‘long’ response for each stimulus
across generations.
Figure 3:Identification curves of stimuli with duration manip-
ulation only, with the vowel quality of the base sounds main-
tained.
the continuous step values of vowel duration, F1, F2, and their
interactions with generation (younger vs. older, older group was
set as the reference level). Random intercepts were included for
participants and stimulus repetitions. At the individual level,
identification data for each participant were analyzed using lo-
gistic regression models fitted with theglm()function. The
response variable was the identification response, and the pre-
dictors were step values of vowel duration, F1, and F2. The
relative weight of each cue was indexed by the log-odds coeffi-
cient of the corresponding predictor in the model [34].
Response times were log-transformed prior to analysis. A
linear mixed-effects regression model was then fitted to the log-
transformed response time using thelmer()function from the
lmerTestpackage [32, 35]. The response variable was log-
transformed response time. Fixed effects included stimulus
condition (defined as different integrations of vowel duration
and vowel quality, as shown in Table 3), generation (younger
group was set as the reference level), and their interaction. Ran-
dom intercepts were included for participants.
3. Result
3.1. Identification data
3.1.1. Group level
The identification results of the two age groups are shown in
Figure 2. In this figure, the y-axis and x-axis represent F1 and
F2 steps, respectively; larger step values indicate higher F1 and
F2 values in the stimuli. The numbers 1–5 indicate duration
steps, with larger values corresponding to longer vowel dura-
tion. Overall, the two age groups show highly similar percep-
tual patterns. As vowel duration increases, the proportion of
responses identified as the long vowel/a:/also increases. In
addition, vowel quality also has a significant effect: stimuli with
vowel quality closer to the long vowel (i.e. higher F1 and F2)
are more likely to be perceived as/a:/.
7374
To more clearly illustrate the effects of vowel duration
and vowel quality on perception, we further selected stimuli in
which vowel quality was held constant and only duration ma-
nipulated. The results are shown in Figure 3. In this figure,
the y-axis represents the proportion of/a:/responses, and the
x-axis represents duration steps, with larger values indicating
longer vowels. Solid lines represent stimuli with short-vowel
/a/quality, dashed lines represent stimuli with long-vowel/a:/
quality, error bars represent standard errors. It can be clearly ob-
served that, when vowel duration is identical, stimuli with long-
vowel quality (dashed lines) are consistently more likely to be
identified as long vowel than stimuli with short-vowel quality
(solid lines). This pattern is consistent across both age groups.
The results of mixed-effects logistic regression model (Ta-
ble 2) confirm the above observation for the perception of vowel
length contrast in NV . In particular,durationemerged as the
most salient perceptual cue overall (β= 1.22,p <0.001),
followed byF1(β= 0.97,p<0.001).F2showed the small-
est cue weight (β= 0.15,p= 0.004). All cues had pos-
itive log-odds coefficients, indicating that stimuli with longer
durationand higherF1andF2were more likely to be identi-
fied as/a:/rather than/a/. The interaction terms between each
cue andgenerationcapture age-related differences in cue use.
As shown in Table 2, no significant age-related differences were
found for vowel quality cues. The interactions betweenF1and
generation(β=−0.03,p >0.05) and betweenF2and
generation(β= 0.10,p >0.05) were both non-significant.
This indicates that younger and older listeners relied on vowel
quality cues in a similar way when identifying long and short
vowels. In contrast, a small but significant age-related differ-
ence was observed for thedurationcue. The interaction be-
tweendurationandgenerationwas significant (β= 0.25,
p <0.001), which suggests that younger listeners were more
sensitive todurationcue than older listeners in vowel length
perception.
Table 2:Results of mixed-effects logistic regression model for
identification data
Log-Odds SE z value p
(Intercept) -5.60 0.25 -22.05 0.000
duration 1.22 0.04 30.80 0.000
F1 0.97 0.06 16.85 0.000
F2 0.15 0.05 2.92 0.004
generation -0.94 0.37 -2.51 0.012
duration×generation 0.25 0.06 4.18 0.000
F1×generation -0.03 0.08 -0.33 0.739
F2×generation 0.10 0.08 1.27 0.203
MarginalR 2 = 0.547 / ConditionalR 2 = 0.578
To better illustrate age-related differences in the weighting
of vowel duration and vowel quality cues, we conducted ad-
ditional analyses on selected subsets of the perceptual stimuli.
We first analyzed stimuli in which duration was manipulated
while vowel quality was held constant.Basewas treated as a
binary factor (long vs. short) representing vowel quality. We
fitted a mixed-effects logistic regression model with identifica-
tion response as the dependent variable. Fixed effects included
base(vowel quality),generation, and their interaction. Ran-
dom intercepts for participants and stimulus repetitions were in-
cluded. The interaction betweenbaseandgenerationwas vi-
sualized in Figure 4 (left), which plots the predicted log-odds of
long-vowel responses. Stimuli with long-vowel quality elicited
Figure 4:Interaction plots between listener generation and
vowel quality (left) and vowel duration (right), with the verti-
cal bars showing 95% confidence interval.
Figure 5:Relative perceptual cue weights by participant. The
first letter of each label indicates gender (F = female, M =
male); the following two digits indicate age; and the final let-
ter in some participants (e.g., A, N) represents the first letter of
their pseudo-first name, used to distinguish individuals of the
same age and gender.
more long-vowel responses than those with short-vowel quality
in both age groups, with no significant age-related differences
observed (base×generation:β=−0.15,p>0.05).
We then analyzed stimuli in which vowel quality was ma-
nipulated while duration was held constant. In this analysis,
basewas treated as a binary factor (long vs. short) representing
vowel duration. A mixed-effects logistic regression model was
also fitted with the identification response as the response vari-
able. Fixed effects includedbase(vowel duration),generation
and their interaction. Random intercepts were included for par-
ticipants and stimulus repetitions. The interaction betweenbase
andgenerationwas visualized in Figure 4 (right), which plots
the predicted log-odds of long-vowel responses. Stimuli with
long-vowel duration enduced more long-vowel responses than
those with short-vowel duration. In addition, younger listeners
showed a greater ability to use duration cues to distinguish long
and short vowels (base×generation:β= 0.99,p= 0.01).
3.1.2. Individual level
Figure 5 shows the relative perceptual cue weights (higher log-
odds values indicate greater weight) for each participant. At
the individual level, most listeners relied primarily on duration
to distinguish long and short vowels, followed byF1, withF2
showing the smallest cue weight. All younger listeners used du-
ration as the primary perceptual cue. In the older group, how-
ever, 6 out of 21 listeners relied primarily onF1rather than
duration (F42, F47, F53, F56, M47, M49).
7375
Figure 6:RT in congruent and incongruent conditions by vowel
quality (long vs. short) and generation (older vs. younger).
3.2. Response time (RT)
We followed the approach of Gao [36] and Ge et al. [37] to
classify the perceptual stimuli and examine whether different
integrations of vowel quality and vowel duration affect listen-
ers’ response time (RT).
The experiment included five vowel duration steps and
three vowel quality steps defined byF1andF2. Along the
duration continuum, Step 1 was the shortest and Step 5 was the
longest. Stimuli at Steps 1–2 were categorized as short, and
those at Steps 4–5 as long. Along theF1andF2continua,
Step 1 had the lowestF1andF2values, while Step 3 had the
highest values. The vowel quality of stimuli with bothF1and
F2at Step 1 corresponded to/a/, whereas that of stimuli at
Step 3 corresponded to/a:/. Only stimuli at duration Steps 1,
2, 4 and 5, with bothF1andF2at either Step 1 or Step 3, were
included in the analysis.
The selected stimuli were then grouped into four types: (1)
short-vowel duration×short-vowel quality, (2) short-vowel du-
ration×long-vowel quality, (3) long-vowel duration×short-
vowel quality, and (4) long-vowel duration×long-vowel qual-
ity. Conditions (1) and (4) were classified asduration–quality
congruent, whereas Conditions (2) and (3) were classified as
duration–quality incongruent. A summary of this classifi-
cation is provided in Table 3.
Table 3:Summary of the stimuli conditions in the experiment
Duration step Vowel quality Condition
1-2 (short)/a/congruent
1-2 (short)/a:/incongruent
4-5 (long)/a/incongruent
4-5 (long)/a:/congruent
Figure 6 shows the mean RT for congruent and incongru-
ent conditions by vowel quality (long vs. short) and generation
(older vs. younger), error bars represent standard errors. Over-
all, the older group exhibited longer RT than the younger group,
indicating slower responses in general. This may be due to older
individuals tending to process information more slowly. In ad-
dition, less familiarity with computer-based tasks may also con-
tribute to longer RT in the older group. Figure 6 further shows
that both age groups required longer RT when processing in-
congruent stimuli than congruent stimuli.
To statistically test these observations, a linear mixed-
effects model was fitted with log-transformed RT as the de-
pendent variable. The predictors included stimuluscondition
(congruent vs. incongruent; reference level: congruent),
generation(younger vs. older; reference level: younger), and
their interaction. The model results reported in Table 4 sup-
port the patterns observed in Figure 6. Specifically, the younger
group responded significantly faster than the older group (β=
0.51,p <0.001), indicating faster perceptual processing. Fur-
thermore, participants showed longer RT for incongruent stim-
uli than for congruent stimuli (β= 0.15,p= 0.001), without
significant age-related differences (β=−0.08,p>0.05).
Table 4:Results of linear mixed-effects model for response time
Estimates SE t value p
(Intercept) 6.31 0.08 80.23 0.000
condition 0.15 0.05 3.20 0.001
generation 0.51 0.11 4.61 0.000
condition×generation -0.08 0.07 -1.17 0.244
MarginalR 2 = 0.174 / ConditionalR 2 = 0.476
This response delay suggests that the integration of vowel
duration and vowel quality constitutes linguistic knowledge
shared by listeners across age groups. When auditory input mis-
matches this expected integration, additional cognitive process-
ing is required, resulting in slower responses for both younger
and older listeners.
4. Discussion and Conclusion
The present study shows that vowel duration,F1andF2all
contribute to the perception of vowel length contrast in NV . In
particular, vowel duration is the primary perceptual cue, while
F1andF2serve as secondary cues. This is consistent with
previous findings on the perception of vowel length contrasts
in Thai [38], Long’an Zhuang [5] and Daiya [4]. In addition,
the response time data indicate that NV listeners have expecta-
tions about the integration of vowel duration and vowel quality.
When listeners heard incongruent stimuli (for example, long du-
ration integrated with short-vowel quality, or short duration in-
tegrated with long-vowel quality), they responded more slowly
overall. This effect is similar to findings on the interaction be-
tweenf0and breathy voice in the perception of Suzhou Wu
tones [37]. Taken together, both vowel duration and vowel qual-
ity influence vowel length perception in NV , as reflected in both
identification rate and processing efficiency.
We also observed age-related differences in the relative
weighting of perceptual cues. Specifically, younger listeners
showed a higher cue weight for vowel duration than older listen-
ers, indicating greater sensitivity to duration cues. At the indi-
vidual level, six older participants relied primarily onF1rather
than duration to distinguish long and short vowels. These find-
ings suggest that the vowel length contrast in NV is probably
undergoing a cue-shifting change, with the primary perceptual
cue shifting from vowel quality to duration, making duration
cues more salient in the younger group. However, this conclu-
sion awaits further validation in future typological research.
In addition to the perception experiment reported in this
study, further analysis of how vowel length contrasts are pro-
duced in the same community, along with the inclusion of multi-
ple speakers (e.g., female voices) in the perception experiment,
is needed. Such an approach would reveal how vowel length
contrasts are produced by speakers and interpreted by listen-
ers across different age groups, thereby shedding light on the
perception–production mapping and offering deeper insight into
the mechanisms of sound change.
7376
5. Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the National Social Science Fund
of China (No. 22&ZD218). We thank all the participants
for generously giving their time to this research and the three
anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments.
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Two generative AI tools (ChatGPT and Qwen3-Max) were used
only to assist with language polishing and correction of gram-
matical errors. All analyses, interpretations, and conclusions
are those of the authors.