Head-Worn Dipole Microphone Array-based Speech Enhancement System for
Single-Sided Deafness
Ken Takaki
ID 1, Kouei Yamaoka
ID 1, Yoshihiro Kawahara
ID 1
1 The University of Tokyo, Japan
{takaki, kawahara}@akg.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, kouei yamaoka@ipc.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
People with single-sided deafness (SSD) struggle to hear on
their deaf side. However, conventional hearing aids typically
have forward directionality to enhance speech from the front of
the listener, making them poorly suited to SSD users, who need
improved intelligibility of lateral speech. This gap motivates
dedicated hardware and signal processing for hearing aids tar-
geting the lateral direction. In this work, we construct a MEMS
dipole microphone array with a side-directed beam to enhance
sounds arriving laterally. We measured the array’s transfer func-
tions on a dummy head and simulated a noisy scenario. Beam-
forming with an array of two dipole and one omnidirectional
microphones improved SDR by 0.78 dB and ESTOI by 0.04
for lateral speech, compared to a 3-channel omnidirectional ar-
ray colocated. Our show-and-tell features audio demos and live
real-time beamforming to show the potential of dipole micro-
phones for this application and raise awareness of SSD in the
community.
Index Terms: single-sided deafness, dipole, microphone array,
beamforming
1. Introduction
Single-sided deafness (SSD) significantly restricts social partic-
ipation in hearing/speaking cultures because it makes it difficult
to hear conversations on the deaf side. Although hearing aids
typically prioritize enhancing sounds arriving from the front, in-
dividuals with SSD have difficulty hearing sounds arriving from
directly lateral to the deaf side, rather than from the front [1].
To improve the intelligibility of sounds in front of the user,
hearing aids often employ directional microphones or apply dif-
ferential beamforming across multiple omnidirectional micro-
phones with a beam facing the front. Speech enhancement
via smart glasses is also becoming increasingly widespread;
beamforming on head-worn arrays with omnidirectional micro-
phones has been explored [2]. Therefore, microphone designs
targeting lateral intelligibility, the very direction problematic for
individuals with SSD, remain unexplored.
To address this gap, we propose improving the speech intel-
ligibility of laterally arriving sounds by combining dipole mi-
crophones with side-directed directivity into a microphone ar-
ray. We designed a custom array of four dipole microphones
and four omnidirectional microphones, mounted it on a dummy
head, and measured the transfer functions in an anechoic cham-
ber. Speech-shaped noise was played from the diagonal direc-
tions of the dummy head (±45° and±135°), while speech was
played from positions surrounding the user, and the speech in-
telligibility was evaluated. The results showed that, at the lateral
direction (90°), the dipole microphone array and the array com-
bining omnidirectional and dipole microphones achieved higher
4 ch omni &
4 ch dipole
microphones
PDM to ADAT
Converter
USB
Audio
Interface PC
Processor
(MVDR)
Earphone
Output
(a)
(b)
dipole microphones
omnidirectional microphones
outer side
inner side
glasses adapter
Figure 1: (a) Block diagram of our 8-channel glasses hearing
system for demonstration. (b) The detailed illustration of the
linear microphone array attached to the glasses.
signal-to-distortion ratio (SDR), extended short-time objective
intelligibility (ESTOI), and perceptual evaluation of speech
quality (PESQ) scores than the array of omnidirectional micro-
phones alone.
The theme of Interspeech is “Speaking Together,” and com-
munication regardless of hearing impairment is indispensable to
this vision. In this show-and-tell session, we aim to communi-
cate the challenges of SSD, a topic that has received limited
attention in the signal processing community, and the charac-
teristics of dipole microphones, through audio demonstrations
and a live hardware demo of beamforming in action.
2. System Design
2.1. Glasses Microphone Array with Dipole Microphones
The microphone array designed for attachment to a pair of
glasses is shown in Fig. 1 (b). Four omnidirectional micro-
phones (Infineon Technologies, IM73D122V01) are arranged
with a spacing of 12 mm, for which spatial aliasing occurs at
approximately 14.3 kHz. Dipole microphones (Soundskrit, Inc.,
SKR0610) are placed at the midpoints between the omnidi-
rectional elements. To orient the directivity of the dipole mi-
crophone array directly to the side, each dipole microphone is
mounted such that its openings face the outer and inner sides of
the glasses, yielding an acoustic path length of 11 mm. Spatial
aliasing for this configuration therefore occurs at approximately
15.6 kHz. A glasses adapter is attached to the right end of the
microphone array, enabling it to be mounted on the glasses.
2.2. Signal Acquisition and Response Measurement
The four-channel omnidirectional microphones and the four-
channel dipole microphones output fully synchronized pulse-
4469
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia

0
45
90
135
180
-135
-90
-45
−15
−10
−5
0
5
SDR (dB)
1 omni mic 1 dipole mic 3 omni mics 3 dipole mics (proposed) 2 dipole + 1 omni mics (proposed)
0
45
90
135
180
-135
-90
-45
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
ESTOI
0
45
90
135
180
-135
-90
-45
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
PESQ
Figure 2: Comparison of objective metrics on different speech incident angles under speech-shaped noise.
density-modulation (PDM) signals to enable beamforming.
These signals are converted into ADAT (Alesis Digital Audio
Tape) optical signals and fed to a PC through a USB audio inter-
face. Converting the signals to the optical domain substantially
reduces the electrical noise in the recorded sound.
The microphone array was attached to a pair of glasses,
mounted on a dummy head (SAMAR HATS Type 4700M), and
measured in an anechoic room. The transfer functions were
measured along the azimuth direction in steps of 7.5°.
2.3. Signal Model and Beamforming
The captured signals are processed on the PC using a minimum
variance distortionless response (MVDR) beamformer (BF).
The sampling frequency is 16 kHz, and processing is performed
in the frequency domain using a short-time Fourier transform
with a window length of 512 samples and a hop size of 128
samples. The multi-channel observation at frame index ℓ and
frequency bink∈{1,...,K } is modeled as
x(k)
ℓ =s(k)
ℓ a(k)(θt) + n(k)
ℓ ∈ CM, (1)
wheres(k)
ℓ is the anechoic source spectrum,M is the number of
microphones, a(k)(θt) is the array steering vector at the target
direction, and n(k)
ℓ aggregates all noise contributions.
Leth(k)
ref (θt) denote the head-related transfer function at a
designated reference channel mref (the omnidirectional front-
center microphone). Define ˜a(k)(θt) = h(k)(θt)/h(k)
ref (θt)
with R(k)
n ∈ CM ×M the noise covariance matrix (NCM). Then,
the MVDR BF is designed and applied as follows:
w⋆ = R−1
n ˜a(θt)
˜a(θt)HR−1
n ˜a(θt), y ℓ = w⋆ Hxℓ (2)
where·
H
denotes the Hermitian transpose and the frequency in-
dexk is suppressed for notational ease.
3. Simulation and Results
We used TIMIT [3] as the speech material. A single speech
source was placed around the listener with an angle sweep. The
speech level was adjusted so that the SDR at the single omni-
directional microphone for the 90° direction was 0 dB. Speech-
shaped noise was played from four directions,±45° and±135°.
Each clip was 10 s long: the first 5 s contained only noise, and
the latter 5 s contained noise and speech. An oracle NCM was
used for BF based on the audio. Forty clips were generated per
condition for evaluation.
We compared five signal-processing conditions: an omnidi-
rectional microphone, a single dipole microphone, three dipole
microphones (w/ BF), three omnidirectional microphones (w/
BF), and a combination of two dipole microphones and one
omnidirectional microphone (w/ BF). Fig. 2 shows the means
of SDR, ESTOI, and PESQ. The dipole microphone is fa-
vored at 90° in terms of SDR and ESTOI, while the omni-
directional microphone is favored from −45° to 45°. In con-
trast, for the MVDR beamforming, the dipole and omni+dipole
BFs outperformed the omnidirectional BF at 90°. In this di-
rection, the (3 omni, 3 dipole, 2 dipole + 1 omni) config-
urations achieved SDR values of (2.28, 3.24, 3.06) dB, ES-
TOI values of (0.453, 0.484, 0.495), and PESQ values of
(1.247, 1.282, 1.278). Interestingly, the BFs using dipole mi-
crophones also outperformed the 3-omnidirectional BF in the
range from −45° to 0°.
4. Conclusion and Demonstration
Our results indicate that using dipole microphones makes lat-
erally arriving sounds, which are difficult for individuals with
SSD to hear, more intelligible, showing the potential of using
dipole microphone arrays for SSD solutions.
In the live demo, the user can choose between perform-
ing voice activity detection (V AD) manually and automatically
updating the NCM via a learning-based V AD system, and the
MVDR output can be monitored directly through earphones.
5. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Opus 4.7 was used to translate the Japanese version of the
manuscript into English, and the translation was carefully
proofread and edited by the authors.
6. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number
JP25K03149.