Universality of Speech Emotion Recognition in Humans
and Speech Language Models
Yuka Tatsumi ID 1, Nathan Roll ID 1, Robert D. Hawkins ID 1, Meghan Sumner ID 1, Dan Jurafsky ID 1
1 Department of Linguistics, Stanford University, California, USA
ytatsumi@stanford.edu, nroll@stanford.edu, rdhawkins@stanford.edu, sumner@stanford.edu,
jurafsky@stanford.edu
Abstract
Humans can recognize the emotional content of speech
in unfamiliar languages fairly accurately, a phenomenon
known asuniversality. However, it remains unclear whether
computational speech encoder models also exhibituniversality
in detecting emotions. This study compares 101 English
monolingual human listeners and two English monolingual
speech language models (SLMs) on cross-language recognition
of basic emotions in French, Japanese, Greek, and Thai.
Both humans and SLMs performed well above chance level,
supportinguniversality. Yet we found differences across
emotions: humans were more accurate for negative emotions
and tended to default toneutralresponses, whereas models
performed best on and defaulted tohappyandsurprise.
These findings demonstrateuniversalityin SLM emotion
recognition while highlighting that machines have distinct
recognition patterns from humans, underscoring the need for
cross-disciplinary study of emotion.
Index Terms: cross-language, speech emotion recognition,
universality, Whisper, HuBERT
1. Introduction
Psychological theories of emotion recognition have suggested
that there areuniversalaspects of human emotion recognition:
people can identify emotions expressed by individuals from
unfamiliar cultures and languages [1, 2, 3].
Do computational systems exhibituniversalityas well?
If SLMs, trained mainly to do speech recognition, succeed
at recognizing emotion in unfamiliar languages, it would
suggest thatuniversalitycan arise from broadly learned
acoustic representations. Yet cross-lingual speech emotion
recognition (SER) is a difficult domain generalization
challenge; the representations of models optimized for
monolingual transcription may be limited to within-language
information. Further, SLM performance might achieve
universalityin ways that are qualitatively different than people.
For example, people and machines might have different
emotional defaults or response biases. Here we ask:
1. Do humans and SLMs similarly exhibituniversalityin
emotional speech recognition?
2. Do humans and SLMs show similar performance across the
different emotions?
3. Do humans and SLMs exhibit similar response biases?
To our knowledge, this work provides the first direct
and systematic comparison of cross-lingual emotional speech
recognition between human listeners and frozen ASR-trained
SLM encoders, using identical emotion data and tasks.
2. Related Work on Emotion Recognition
In humans: Psychological studies on human speech emotion
recognition have consistently showeduniversality[3, 4, 5, 6, 7];
for a review, see [8]. Across studies, listeners reliably identify
emotions from unfamiliar languages that they do not understand
above chance level, often around three times chance [9, 10].
In addition, listeners typically recognize negative emotions
more accurately than positive emotions [4, 5, 11, 12].In
SLMs:Computational systems have achieved around 65–90%
accuracy on cross-lingual SER using transformer models such
as wav2vec 2.0 [13], WavLM [14], HuBERT [15], and Whisper
[16]. What is not clear is how humans and machines differ
with respect touniversalityin emotion recognition. We
aim to address this gap by directly comparing monolingual
human listeners and SLMs on standard identical cross-language
emotion data.
3. Method
We conducted emotional speech recognition experiments with
both human English monolingual listeners and two English
monolingual SLMs, Whisper [17] and HuBERT [18], using the
same emotional speech datasets.
3.1. Human Experiment
3.1.1. Participants
A total of 120 participants were recruited via Prolific.
Eligibility criteria required participants to be monolingual
English speakers born in and currently located in the United
States, with less than two years of non-English language
education. Data from 119 participants were successfully
recorded. The mean age was 37.7 years (SD = 12.61; range
= 18–72). Of these participants, 53.3% identified as female and
46.7% as male. Self-reported race was 65% White, 30% Black,
3% Mixed, and 1.7% Other. 18 participants were excluded
from the analyses (most for not meeting language background
eligibility criteria based on the post-experiment survey).
3.1.2. Stimuli
We used four non-English emotional speech datasets [19, 20,
21, 22, 23], which were selected based on three criteria: open
access, in-lab recordings, and performances by professional
actors. While there is ongoing discussion regarding the extent
to which acted emotion reflects real-life emotional speech
processing, these criteria were chosen to ensure a controlled
and comparable experimental setting across languages and
systems. The selected languages were Canadian French,
Japanese, Greek, and Thai, which differ typologically and
2308
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3061
include relatively less-studied languages.
The final stimulus pool is shown in Table 1 and include 6
emotions in French stimuli, 5 in Japanese, and 4 in Greek and
Thai. Because these datasets were developed independently for
different research purposes, we were not able to identify a set
of datasets with identical emotion categories while maintaining
language diversity and the criteria described above. However,
the emotionshappy,angry, andsadwere shared across all four
languages, and the six emotion categories correspond to five of
Ekman’s basic emotions plusneutral(lack of emotion).
For each experimental session, a total of 67 items were
randomly selected while maximizing counterbalancing across
language, emotion, speaker, and utterance. Specifically, for
each emotion within each language, participants heard one
utterance from each of the four speakers. Utterances were
selected to minimize overlap within a session, and attention
check audio files were also presented.
3.1.3. Procedure
After providing informed consent, participants received
instructions and an introduction to the task, followed by the
main trials. The experiment was framed as an “emotion
recognition ability test”. Participants were informed that each
question had a time limit and that failure to respond multiple
times in a row would result in termination of the session,
encouraging timely responses. In each trial, participants heard
an audio clip once and judged the intended emotion by selecting
from the following options:happy,sad,angry,fear,surprise,
andneutral. Participants who failed any attention check had
their session terminated immediately.
After completing the main task, participants filled out
a brief questionnaire confirming background information
(including language history) and reporting their experience with
the experiment, to ensure data quality. At the end of the session,
participants were shown their emotion recognition “score” as
a percentage, both overall and broken down by language.
Compensation was $3 per 15 minutes. The median session
duration was 14 minutes and 49 seconds.
3.2. SLM Experiment
To examine the extent to which SLMs encode emotional
information, we trained layer-wise logistic regression probes
on two frozen English monolingual ASR models. Probes were
trained exclusively on English emotional speech and tested on
non-English stimuli.
3.2.1. Model
As the equivalent of English monolingual listeners, we chose
two 24-layer transformer-based monolingual ASR models:
Whisper-medium.en [17] and HuBERT-large-ll60k [18]. The
medium model of Whisper was the largest English-only
Whisper variant available. Both models were analyzed without
any additional fine-tuning, ensuring that the results reflect
the emotion representations present in the encoder as learned
through pretraining.
3.2.2. Classifier Training Stimuli
To train the classifiers, we used three English emotional speech
datasets: The English part of ESD [24], CREMA-D [25], and
the speech part of RA VDESS [26] (Table 1). These datasets
were selected using the same criteria as the non-English datasets
used in the human experiment, as described above (3.1.2).
From all of these datasets, we only used the six emotions
(happy, sad, angry, fear, surprise, and neutral), to match the
emotion categories in human experiments. The overall item
distribution was: 7442 items from CREMA-D, 1556 items from
RA VDESS, and 17500 items from ESD.
3.2.3. Test Stimuli
To evaluate the model on non-English speech, we used the exact
same stimulus set used in the human experiment, described in
Section 3.1.2.
3.2.4. Procedure
All audio stimuli were resampled to 16 kHz to ensure
compatibility with the input requirements of both models.
The English training stimuli were partitioned into training,
validation, and test sets using an 80/10/10% split, stratified by
emotion and source dataset. The non-English datasets were
reserved entirely for testing in order to mirror the structure of
the human experiment.
First, all audio items were processed through the frozen
encoders of each model, and hidden state embeddings were
extracted from all 24 layers. Second, we applied global
mean pooling over the temporal dimension to obtain a single
utterance-level representation. This resulted in a fixed-length
vector of dimensionality 1024 for every layer. Finally,
we trained multinomial logistic regression probes withL 2
regularization, on the English training data using Scikit-learn.
Performance was evaluated on both the held-out English data
and the non-English data. Importantly, the evaluation on the
non-English data involved no further fine-tuning or adaptation,
allowing for a direct comparison with human perceptual
performance.
3.2.5. Analysis
For the following analyses, we selected the layer with the
highest English validation accuracy as our primary analysis
layer (layer 17 for Whisper, layer 11 for HuBERT; we refer
to these layers as “primary analysis layers” hereafter), as this
represents a priori criterion independent of the cross-lingual test
data. The emotion recognition accuracy values in section 4 are a
lower bound on max model performance because, in both cases,
other layers achieved the highest accuracy on the non-English
test set. The robustness of the main findings across layers is
reported in the section 4.2 and 4.5.1.
4. Results
We present emotion recognition performance for human and
SLMs separately, followed by a direct statistical comparison.
We then turn to differences by emotion, and response biases.
4.1. Human Experiment
Overall mean emotion recognition accuracy (the proportion of
correct responses across all trials, participants and dataset) was
43.8% (Figure 1). Chance performance was defined as the
proportion of trials belonging to the most frequent emotion
category (sad; 21.4%).
Mean recognition accuracies varied across emotions and
datasets. Collapsing across languages, mean accuracy by
emotion was highest forneutralspeech (80.0%), followed
byangry(58.5%). Lower accuracies were observed forfear
(41.3%) andsad(39.5%), with the lowest performance for
2309
Table 1:Overview of Datasets
Type Dataset Language Emotions Speakers Utterances
Test Stimuli Pool
CaFE Canadian French happy, sad, angry, fear, surprise, neutral 2F 2M 6
JVNV Japanese happy, sad, angry, fear, surprise 2F 2M 20
AESDD Greek happy, sad, angry, fear 2F 2M 40*
THAI-SER Thai happy, sad, angry, neutral 2F 2M 3
Classifier Training
Datasets
ESD English happy, sad, angry, surprise, neutral 10 6
CREMA-D English happy, sad, angry, fear, neutral 12 91
RA VDESS English happy, sad, angry, fear, surprise, neutral 24 2
*Unique sentences per emotion.
Figure 1:Overall emotion recognition accuracy by system for
non-English items
surprise(33.0%) andhappyexpressions (22.6%). Collapsing
across emotions, mean accuracy also differed by dataset,
with the highest performance observed for Canadian French
(51.8%), followed by Thai (46.5%) and Japanese (40.9%), and
the lowest accuracy observed for Greek (33.1%).
Accuracy also varied substantially across participants, with
individual mean accuracies ranging from 17% to 63%. The
median participant-level accuracy was 44.7% (SD = 8.8%).
4.2. SLM Experiment
The layer-wise probing results from Whisper and HuBERT are
shown in Fig. 2. Among the 24 layers, layer 17 achieved the
highest validation accuracy for Whisper (89.1%), while layer 11
for HuBERT (88.0%). On the held-out English test data these
layers achieved 90.2% and 89.6% mean accuracy, respectively.
On the non-English data, accuracies were 39.0% (Whisper) and
48.3% (HuBERT), well exceeding the chance level of 21.4%
(Observed means for Figure 1).
Figure 2:Layer-wise probing accuracy for Whisper (Left) and
HuBERT (Right)
Whisper’s mean probing accuracy on the non-English test
data shows no significant trends across layers, although perhaps
some of the final layers perform a little less well. HuBERT
exhibited a much clearer drop in performance in the later layers,
with near chance performance by layer 18 and generally low
performance for the last 6 layers. Overall, however, both models
performed comparably, especially in the early-to-mid layers.
Performance on the non-English test datasets at the
primary analysis layer varied substantially across emotion
categories and languages. Whisper performance also varied
by source: collapsing across emotions, the highest accuracies
were observed for Greek (51.4%) and Thai (47.9%), followed
by French (39.6%), and then Japanese (33.5%). For HuBERT,
the performance was highest for Greek (63.7%), followed by
French (53.5%), Thai (45.8%), and Japanese (41.4%). We
discuss performance by emotion further in Section 4.4.
4.3. System Comparison
To compare human and SLM performance, we conducted a
stratified item-level bootstrap analysis (10,000 resamples) of the
mean accuracy difference, weighted by the number of human
observations per item. Performance differences were computed
as model accuracy minus human accuracy.
For the Whisper–Human comparison, the observed mean
difference was -1.4%. The 95% BCa confidence interval (CI)
crossed zero ([-6.7%, 3.9%]), indicating that the performance
gap between Whisper and human listeners was not statistically
significant. By contrast, the HuBERT–Human comparison
yielded an observed mean difference of 6.8%. The 95%
BCa CIs remained above zero (BCa CI [1.8%, 12.0%]),
indicating that HuBERT’s performance was significantly better
than human listeners.
4.4. Accuracy ranking by emotion
We next analyzed accuracy by emotion category, finding
that human recognition accuracy was highest forneutral
items, followed byangry,fear,sad,surprise, andhappy, in
descending order of accuracy (Figure 3). By contrast, the
models displayed markedly different patterns. For Whisper,
the highest accuracy was observed forhappyspeech (89.1%),
followed bysad(35.3%),surprise(29.9%),angry(24.6%),
andfear(17.5%). The model produced only a single
neutralresponse, resulting in 0% accuracy for that category.
Similarly, HuBERT’s by-emotion accuracy diverged from
human performance, reaching its peak forsurprise(81.0%),
followed byhappy(63.3%) andsad(52.4%), and then lower
accuracy for theangry(39.9%),fear(19.0%), andneutral
(13.9%) categories.
Overall, humans and models exhibited very different
rankings of emotion recognition accuracy.
2310
Figure 3:Absolute ranking of recognition accuracy by emotion
4.5. Response Bias
Although §4.4 showed highest accuracy forneutralby humans,
happyby Whisper, and surprise by HuBERT, these results do
not necessarily indicate superior recognition of those emotions.
High accuracy can arise from a response bias, whereby a system
disproportionately defaults to a particular emotion label. As a
proxy for response bias, we analyzed the distribution of emotion
labels assigned inincorrectresponses.
The results are shown in Figure 4. Across all intended
emotions, human participants most frequently selectedneutral
(32.4%) when their responses were incorrect. Whisper’s
primary analysis layer most frequently selectedhappy(52.4%),
and HuBERT most frequently selectedsurprise(53.0%).
This result could not be due to item frequency differences.
Our items did differ in frequency (263sad, 257angry, 255
happy, 248fear, 169surprise, 36neutral). Yet whileneutral
was the least frequent category in the dataset, it was chosen in
32% of all incorrect trials. Because 1192 non-neutral stimuli
(97.1% of all items) provided substantially more opportunities
for mislabeling, the high rate ofneutralresponses indicates a
strong response bias towardneutralamong human participants.
Similarly, HuBERT’s tendency to selectsurprise, despite
surprisehaving the second smallest number of items, provides
additional evidence of response bias.
Figure 4:Emotions selected when responses were incorrect
4.5.1. Response Biases in Non-primary Analysis Layers
In addition to examining response bias at the primary analysis
layer (layer 17 for Whisper and 11 for HuBERT), we analyzed
accuracies and response biases across layers.
For Whisper, early-to-middle layers (1–12 and 17–19) are
dominated by ahappybias, whereas the final layers (20–23,
and 24 to a lesser extent) shift strongly toward angry-biased
responses. By contrast, HuBERT largely maintains asurprise
bias across layers, with some idiosyncratic fluctuations. The
surprisebias peaks at layer 18, where 91.8% of incorrect
responses were categorized assurprise. A few layers (7, 10,
22, and 24) instead show ahappybias, suggesting thathappy
functions as a secondary response tendency in HuBERT.
Despite some variation in layer-specific response patterns,
each system generally exhibited a substantial and consistent
bias toward an emotion category:neutralfor humans,happy
(with anangrybias emerging in later layers) for Whisper, and
surprisefor HuBERT (withhappyas a secondary bias).
5. Discussion
We tested whether humans and SLMs show similar
cross-linguistic generalization of emotion recognition
(universality). Comparing monolingual listeners and SLMs,
we found that both humans and models recognized emotions in
typologically diverse unfamiliar languages well above chance.
Our results indicate that large-scale ASR pretraining develops
cross-lingual emotional representations, and thatuniversalityis
a property of models as well as people.
We found that SLMs reached or exceeded human
performance, with no reliable difference between Whisper
and humans, but HuBERT reliably outperforming humans.
One possible explanation for this divergence may lie in
the nature of the pretraining task. Whisper’s training on
transcription may emphasize semantic content and downweight
purely acoustic-prosodic patterns that might cue emotion, while
HuBERT’s self-supervision may preserve and amplify a wider
range of acoustic and prosodic information.
We also found divergences between humans and models
in recognition patterns. Consistent with prior work, humans
identified negative emotions more accurately than positive
emotions, and in our study, they tended to default toneutral
labels. Theneutrallabel may therefore have served functions
such as signaling uncertainty, low confidence, or mixed
emotional cues. Unlike humans, Whisper and HuBERT were
not better at recognizing negative emotion, instead Whisper
showed high accuracy forhappyand HuBERT forsurprise, but
these peaks were largely driven by broad response biases toward
happyandsurprise. The English training sets were not skewed
towardhappyorsurprise, so this defaulting pattern is unlikely
to reflect simple class imbalance. The effect may instead
reflect overgeneralization of English-specific acoustic cues to
non-English speech, or a fallback on dominant pretraining
pattern when emotional cues are weak; these suggest clear
directions for future work.
Some limitations of the present study should be noted.
First, the choice of English dataset for classifier training may
lead to different model behaviors. Second, as Whisper’s
documentation is not fully explicit about the training data of its
English-only variants, the complete exclusion of non-English
audio cannot be guaranteed. Third, we used only one
dataset per non-English language, limiting inference about
language-specific effects. Finally, the corpora were collected
for different purposes and were not fully normalized in emotion
category definitions or performance intensity.
Despite these limitations, our results make important
contributions, showing that fully frozen monolingual ASR
encoders display emotion recognitionuniversalityand perform
at human levels, while response biases may differ between
humans and SLMs. Our results emphasize the need for
fine-grained evaluations beyond overall accuracy, and for
integrating psycholinguistic frameworks with cross-language
SER to move beyond surface-level benchmarks.
2311
6. Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Dan Jurafsky Lab, the Speech and
Cognitive Development Lab, and the Stanford Phonetics Lab
for helpful discussions and feedback throughout this project.
We would also like to thank Peter Kiernan for his assistance
with the statistical analysis.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
A generative AI tool was used solely for limited editorial
support (proofreading for grammar, phrasing, and readability).
It was not used to generate research ideas, methods, analyses,
experimental results, or conclusions, and writing decisions are
the authors’ own. All authors consent to the submission and are
responsible for the work and content.