Speech Recognition to Accelerate Documentation of Marquesan and Cook
Islands M ¯aori
Marie Teikitohe ID 1,∗,∗∗, Rolando Coto-Solano ID 2,∗,∗∗, Sally Akevai Nicholas ID 3
1 University of French Polynesia, French Polynesia
2 Dartmouth College, United States
3 Waipapa Taumata Rau University of Auckland, Aotearoa New Zealand
marie.teikitohe@doctorant.upf.pf, rolando.a.coto.solano@dartmouth.edu,
ake.nicholas@auckland.ac.nz
Abstract
In this paper we report on the training of ASR for Marque-
san. We collected 17 hours of transcribed naturalistic speech
from L1 speakers and used this data to perform three experi-
ments: (i) We used multilingual speech foundation models to
finetune a monolingual Marquesan model. Wav2Vec2 had the
best results, with a median CER=16 and WER=30. (ii) We used
data from another Polynesian language, Cook Islands Maori, to
train transfer and joint models. The joint model showed a mini-
mal improvement for Marquesan (CER=15.4, WER=30.8), but
there were no gains for CIM. (iii) We ran an experiment to de-
termine if transcriptions produced by ASR actually represent a
gain of time in the language documentation process. When hu-
man transcribers corrected from an ASR transcription, this work
was between 0.7x and 2.4x faster than when the audio was tran-
scribed completely manually. We expect to integrate ASR into
the documentation workflow to make the materials available to
the Marquesan-speaking community.
Index Terms: speech recognition, Marquesan, Cook Islands
M¯aori, Polynesian
1. Introduction
Language Documentation is at a crossroads, where it needs to
accelerate its work to help safeguard the thousands of languages
that are seeing their reduced in favor of colonial languages,
while also responding to the needs of Indigenous communi-
ties for data sovereignty and the ethical management of data.
Speech recognition can be a valuable tool in both fronts: It is
a way to accelerate the work of community members dedicated
to language documentation, potentially leaving them more time
to carry on their important community-centered work. Speech
recognition also allows for faster processing of data, which
means that audio recordings and other data gathered through
fieldwork can be returned to the community faster so that it
can be turned into language and cultural revitalization materi-
als. The stakes of this work are both scientific and patrimonial.
Rapid transcription is not only a research objective but also a
means of ensuring community access, language transmission,
and long-term preservation of oral heritage.
In this paper we will apply the tools of automatic speech
recognition (ASR) to Marquesan and Cook Islands M¯aori in the
hopes of integrating these tools into language documentation
workflows. In the first section we will describe both languages
and the existing ASR efforts for Polynesian languages. The sec-
ond section describes the data collection and training method-
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
ologies, and the third section reports our results. Finally, we
discuss how our results indicate that these tools would indeed
have a positive impact on audio transcription times, and suggest
directions for future work.
1.1. Marquesan and Cook Islands M ¯aori
Marquesan is a Polynesian language belonging to the Eastern
Polynesian subgroup of the Austronesian language family. It
is traditionally spoken in the Marquesas Islands, French Poly-
nesia, an archipelago with a population of approximately 9,478
inhabitants. Marquesan comprises six main dialectal varieties
associated with the islands of Nuku-Hiva, Ua Pou, Ua Huka,
Hiva Oa, Tahuata, and Fatu Iva. In addition to the Marque-
sas Islands, Marquesan is also spoken by diaspora communities
across other parts of French Polynesia, particularly in Tahiti and
other urban centers.
Marquesan is traditionally transmitted through oral prac-
tices and remains an important marker of cultural identity. How-
ever, it exists in a multilingual environment and is under in-
creasing pressure from French, the dominant language of ad-
ministration and education, and Tahitian, which functions as a
regional lingua franca in French Polynesia. These contact dy-
namics contribute to variation in contemporary speech, includ-
ing lexical borrowing and code-switching.
At the same time, Marquesan is actively supported through
educational and revitalization initiatives. It is taught in primary
and secondary schools, and bilingual education programs have
been established in several islands. In addition, the language is
supported by the Acad´emie marquisienne, which contributes to
its standardization, promotion, and transmission. These efforts
help maintain the language and promote its use among younger
generations, while also contributing to the development of lin-
guistic resources.
Cook Islands M ¯aori (CIM) is also an Eastern Polyne-
sian language, spoken by 12500 people on the Cook Islands
archipelago, plus approximately 10000 people in the diaspora in
New Zealand and Australia [1, 2]. It is an endangered language,
in that there is a decrease in the number of children who speak
it, particularly in the islands with stronger contact to tourists,
such as Rarotonga [3]. There is some presence of CIM in the
school system, and there is a standardized orthography [4].
1.2. Speech Processing in Polynesian Languages
There has been previous work on ASR for languages like Te
Reo M¯aori from Aotearoa New Zealand (WER=8) [5, 6], Cook
Islands M¯aori (WER=18) [7, 8] and Hawaiian (WER=21) [9].
Speech foundation models like MMS [10] also contain S¯amoan,
1677
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3276
Rapanui and M¯aori data.
There is no known NLP work for Marquesan, although
there are available corpora [11]. There is no published work for
related languages like Tahitian, but it is available on commer-
cial tools like Google Translate. There is some existing work
for Cook Islands M ¯aori in other areas of NLP, including work
on TTS [12], parsing [13, 14], forced alignment [15, 16] and
diacritic restoration [17].
2. Methodology
In this section we will explain the data collection mechanism,
as well as the training regime for our ASR tests. We will also
explain the methodology to test whether the ASR can accelerate
the transcription process.
2.1. Data collection
As for the Marquesan data, the recordings used are part of a
larger Marquesan speech corpus collected in 2024 as part of a
doctoral research project on the contemporary state of the Mar-
quesan language in the Marquesas Islands, French Polynesia.
The recordings typically include both the primary speaker and
the field researcher, reflecting natural conversational conditions
during linguistic fieldwork. All speakers are native speakers of
Marquesan, ranging in age from 46 to 86 years old.
The corpus represents six dialectal varieties corresponding
to the islands of Nuku-Hiva, Ua Pou, Ua Huka, Hiva Oa, Tahu-
ata, and Fatu Iva. The recordings include a range of speech gen-
res, such as personal narratives, accounts of lived experiences,
life histories, cultural practices, and spontaneous conversational
interaction between the speaker and the field researcher. Speak-
ers frequently recount events from their own lives and share cul-
turally significant knowledge. Some recordings also document
traditional knowledge, such as fishing techniques, food prepara-
tion, local history, and mythological narratives. These are spon-
taneous spoken interactions rather than scripted material, and
they reflect natural speech in a fieldwork context.
The recordings were collected in natural fieldwork settings
rather than controlled studio environments. As a result, acoustic
conditions vary across recordings and may include background
noise, wind, and other environmental sounds. While many
recordings involve interaction between the primary speaker and
the field researcher, others may include additional participants
present in the environment. In some cases, two, three, or four
speakers may be audible, and additional individuals may occa-
sionally enter the interaction. These situations reflect authentic
conversational settings.
During corpus preparation, care was taken to exclude seg-
ments containing speech in other languages, primarily French.
However, given the spontaneous and interactive nature of the
recordings, some instances of non-Marquesan speech may re-
main. In addition, background voices, brief overlaps, and sec-
ondary speech may occasionally be present.
All recordings were manually transcribed and segmented
using ELAN [18]. Speech segments were extracted as individ-
ual utterances aligned with the audio signal. Non-speech in-
tervals were excluded. In addition, tokens clearly identified as
belonging to other languages, primarily French code-switching,
were excluded from the training transcripts in order to ensure
consistency of the Marquesan training data.
As for the CIM data, it comes from theTe Vairanga Tu-
atua o te Te Reo M ¯aori o te Pae Tongacollection [19], which
contains ELAN-formatted transcriptions of Cook Islands M¯aori
recordings by L1 speakers from four islands: Rarotonga, Pen-
rhyn, Ma’uke and ’Atiu. This collection is also made up of nat-
uralistic material collected through fieldwork, and it is part of
a larger local project to collect data for language revitalization
and normalization.
The two languages have nearly identical consonantal inven-
tories, 11 for Marquesan versus the same 11 plus /s/ for Cook
Islands M¯aori. Both languages have the same five vowels and
the same long/short distinction. Both languages use apostrophe-
like symbols for the glottal stop phoneme (tukina for Marquesan
and saltillo for CIM), and both use a macron for long vowels.
Their grammars are typological very similar (e.g. VSO order,
TAM system in the verbs, prepositions), and the share important
commonalities in terms of social and family systems, as well as
oral traditions.
2.2. Model Training and Evaluation
For the first stage of testing, we used several state-of-the-art
speech foundation models to finetune a monolingual Marque-
san model. We chose Meta’s Wav2Vec2 Large XLSR-53 [20]
and its derived model MMS-1b-all [10], OpenAI’s Whisper
Medium [21], Nvidia’s Parakeet TDT 0.6b v3 [22], Alibaba’s
Qwen3 ASR 1.7B [23], and Meta’s Omnilingual 1B [24]. Dur-
ing inference, the Wav2Vec2, MMS, Whisper and Omnilingual
models were augmented using a KenLM language model [25].
Both MMS and Whisper were initialized from Te Reo M¯aori.
The Marquesan dataset contained a total of 17 hours (61621
seconds) from 38 speakers, distributed across 16417 recordings,
with an average duration of 3.7±2.0 seconds. Their gold-
standard transcriptions contained 151971 tokens, with an av-
erage length of 9.3±5.6 tokens (41±25 characters). This
dataset was randomly split into a 80/10/10 train/dev/test set,
which was used to train the models. The training was carried
out until the point before overfitting, as determined by the vali-
dation word error rate.
For the second stage of testing, the best performing speech
foundation model was used to train models that combined data
from Marquesan and Cook Islands M¯aori. We used two modal-
ities of training: First, we trained transfer models. For example,
we took the best performing monolingual Marquesan model and
used it as the base for finetuning a monolingual CIM model, and
viceversa. Then, we trained joint models, where the data for
both languages was combined into a single fine-tuning of the
foundation model, and the error was reported for the two lan-
guages separately. We perform these tests to study the potential
effects of learning one Polynesian language from another, given
that multilingual models with related languages have proven ad-
vantageous in ASR, and that this could serve for further regional
cooperation. Finally, we also trained monolingual CIM models,
as a comparison with the Marquesan training process.
For these tests we made five random train/dev/test partitions
of 80/10/10 with the available data. The CIM data consisted of
4 hours (14501 seconds) from 11 speakers, distributed across
5086 recordings, with an average duration of 2.9±1.9 seconds.
Their gold-standard transcriptions contained 36966 tokens, with
an average length of 7.3±5.1 tokens (32±23 characters).
All of the experiments were trained in an HPC environment,
using an Nvidia A100 GPU. In total, all of the experiments used
approximately 246 hours of GPU time.
For the evaluation we calculated the median CER and WER
and averaged them across the five runs. We also performed a
qualitative evaluation of the transcriptions by the best perform-
ing Marquesan model.
1678
2.3. Manual versus Automatic Transcription
Papers for ASR for under-resourced languages assume that
ASR will accelerate the language documentation work, but pa-
pers that verify this hypothesis not only remain scarce, but their
results have high variability, to the point of being contradic-
tory. On one hand, ASR does seem to produce some gains for
low-resource languages. In 2021, Prud’hommeaux et al. re-
ported “an average 31.4% relative reduction in time required
to transcribe” On ¨odow´a’ga: with a Kaldi-based model [26, pp.
501]. In 2025, Billings and McDonnell found gains of 11% to
22% when transcribing Nasal using Whisper [27], and in 2026,
Taguchi et al. reported time gains between 19% and 23% when
transcribing Ikema using a Wav2Vec2 similar to the one on this
paper [28, pp. 3551]. On the other hand, in 2016 Gaur et al.
studied English transcriptions, and found that ASR stops pro-
ducing any time gains when the WER exceeds 30% [29], and in
2024 Gorisch and Schmidt found no consistent time gains when
using ASR to transcribe German using Whisper [30]. The vari-
ability in these results depends on the exact nature of the cor-
rection task, the WER of the model, the interface for correction,
and the experience of the transcribers.
In order to provide further evidence to answer this question,
we conducted a test of the assumption that ASR helps acceler-
ate transcription. We took two recordings of roughly the same
duration (approx. 10 minutes), transcribed them manually and
timed how long the transcription took. We also took two other
similar recordings from the same speaker and transcribed them
with the best performing ASR model, and then proceeded to
correct them using ELAN. Finally, we compared the amount of
work it took to transcribe each minute for both conditions.
3. Results
Here we present the results for the monolingual training of Mar-
quesan models, for the models where Marquesan data is com-
bined with Cook Islands M ¯aori data, and for the experiment to
measure if ASR would actually represent a time gain in a lan-
guage documentation workflow.
3.1. Monolingual Fine-tuning
Table 1 the training of the monolingual fine-tuned models for
Marquesan. Wav2Vec2 with an LM had the best performance,
with a CER of 16.0 and a WER of 31.4. The other models had
similar behavior, with CERs ranging from 18 to 22, and with
relatively high WERs between 36 and 69.
Table 1:Monolingual fine-tuning for Marquesan data (17 hrs)
CER WER
Wav2Vec2-XLSR53 20.7 50.0
Wav2Vec2-XLSR53 (LM)16.0 31.4
Whisper Medium 19.4 41.7
Whisper Medium (LM) 21.0 44.4
parakeet-tdt-0.6b-v3 17.9 38.5
MMS-1b-All 26.4 69.2
MMS-1b-All (LM) 22.0 43.8
Qwen3 ASR 1.7B 29.0 54.8
Omnilingual 1B 19.0 39.2
Omnilingual 1B (LM) 18.9 36.4
The WER for Marquesan is relatively high, particularly
compared with that of CIM. This might be due to confusions
with word boundaries, which are the system’s most common
error, and one that would affect the WER more acutely than the
CER (see section 4.1 below). In general, the error for Marque-
san might also be higher than for CIM because there are many
more speakers (38 versus 11), longer recordings in general, and
a larger amount of unique tokens.
3.2. Transfer and Joint Training
Table 2 shows the results for the transfer and joint training
with Marquesan and CIM data using the best-performing model
(Wav2Vec2+LM). CIM did not benefit from the transfer or the
joint training, and the monolingual fine-tuned model retains the
best performance. However, Marquesan does appear to bene-
fit from joint training: the joint finetuning had a slightly better
performance than the monolingual one, with a modest improve-
ment of approximately 0.6 WER. This improvement, however,
might not be statistically significant: A Mann-Whitney U test
[31] was performed to compare the Marquesan monolingual
and joint finetuning, but it did not reveal a significant differ-
ence (CER: U=8, p=0.17; WER: U=10, p=0.30). More of these
models might need to be run in future work to detect a differ-
ence.
Table 2:Monolingual, transfer and joint fine-tuning from
Wav2Vec2 (LM) for Marquesan and Cook Islands M¯aori.
CER WER
Marquesan Mono 16.0±1.0 31.4±1.5
Transfer 16.9±1.2 33.3±0.0
Joint15.4±0.5 30.8±1.5
CIM Mono1.8±1.3 7.2±4.7
Transfer 2.7±1.3 9.7±4.0
Joint 3.4±3.4 11.9±11.9
3.3. Amount of work to correct ASR transcriptions
Table 3 shows that there is a gain in time when using the ASR.
When transcribing manually, it can take between 5.18 and 9.14
minutes to transcribe a minute of text. On the other hand, when
correcting an ASR automatic transcription, the correction only
takes between 1.51 and 5.18 minutes per audio minute. This
means that using the ASR makes the transcription process be-
tween 74% and 243% times faster.
4. Discussion
In this section we will present examples of the Marquesan au-
tomatic transcriptions and describe their error patterns. We will
also discuss the resuts of the training phase, as well as the ob-
stacles found during the correction of the ASR output.
4.1. Qualitative evaluation
Table 4 shows examples of sentences transcribed by the
monolingual-finetuned Wav2Vec2 Marquesan model. The ex-
amples include a good transcription, an “average” transcription
(which matches the median CER and WER), and a poor tran-
scription.
The most common errors include confusions with word
boundaries and with glottal stops. Proper nouns (e.g. personal
names and place names) are often misrecognized, likely be-
cause they were not present in the training data (e.g. Tauaki-
itoto→tau’a ki’i to to). As the table shows, there are
also some sustitution errors which involve phonetically simi-
1679
Table 3:Amount of work required to manually transcribe audio, versus correcting the ASR output. The units of the work/audio ratio
are work minutes per audio minute. Correcting a text from the ASR transcription is faster than transcribing manually.
Speaker Sample Transcription Audio Duration Work Duration Work/Audio Ratio
SP1 1 From ASR correction 9m46s 51m17s 5.25 (74% faster)
2 Manual 9m46s 89m17s 9.14
SP2 1 From ASR correction 9m35s 14m31s 1.51 (243% faster)
2 Manual 10m01s 51m51s 5.18
Table 4:Examples of good, average and poor ASR transcrip-
tions in Marquesan
Translation Yes, those herbs are gone,
they don’t grow anymore
Reference e ua pao te’ ¯a tau ’eita a’e tupu haka’ua mai
Hypothesis e ua pao te’ ¯a tau ’eita a’e tu haka’ua mai
(CER=0.05, WER=0.10)
TranslationAs if it was Kooamua, Keikahanui
Reference me he mea o kooamua o keikahanui
Hypothesis me he mea ko’oua mua o keikahanui
(CER=0.16, WER=0.29)
Translation It’s Titohe who went to
kill him with a knife
Reference na titohe i hano ve’o
Hypothesis ati’i to ¯ıa hanuve’o
(CER=0.52, WER=1.00)
lar forms; Marquesn has numerous vowel sequences and glottal
stops, which might increase ambiguity for the model. Finally,
recording conditions might also play a role in the error rate.
There are some insertion errors (e.g. me te ana→te vahi
i a’e), which might be due to acoustic ambiguity or overlap-
ping speech. These are natural field recordings, and sometimes
multiple speakers are present, or background voices and over-
laps occur. Human trascribers focus on the primary speaker, but
the model processes all acoustic inputs.
4.2. Training
The Wav2Vec2 model has the best performance amongst the
Speech Foundation models, despite being the oldest. This might
be because the languages in the pre-training of Wav2Vec2 are
balanced, whereas the other models contain large but uneven
quantities of many languages, and they skew heavily towards
European languages. This even knowledge of a wider variety of
languages might be giving Wav2Vec2 an advantage when learn-
ing under-resourced languages.
It should also be noted that the results presented here for
Cook Islands M ¯aori represent an improvement upon the pre-
vious state-of-the-art [7]. Previous monolingual CIM mod-
els were trained using Wav2Vec2 without a KenLM language
model. The language model markedly improves the perfor-
mance of the model, bringing CER from 6 to 2, and WER down
from 18 to 7. This finding is in line with [9], who also found
that Hawaiian ASR performance was improved through the use
of language models in the inference phase. This method is help-
ful because it aids in learning the orthography of the target lan-
guage, the weakest part of the speech foundation model for mi-
nority languages like CIM.
It is surprising that the transfer and joint learning did not
yield larger gains in the case of the Marquesan, and that the
yielded no gains at all in the case of Cook Islands M ¯aori. The
Marquesan corpus is more than 4 times bigger than the CIM,
so the transfer into CIM should have helped the model learn the
Polynesian sounds of Cook Islands M ¯aori better, but this was
not observed in the results. The joint condition provided only
minimal improvement, much lower than that expected. This
will have to be verified in future work by conducting more tri-
als of the same experiment. If this result persists, we would
need more research to understand why we don’t see transfer of
knowledge between these two very similar languages.
4.3. Time Gained by using ASR
Our results indicate that ASR does produce time gains when
transcribing data in Marquesan. This is important as it adds
evidence to the idea that ASR can help in language documenta-
tion. Our results indicate higher reductions in processing time
that those reported by the papers in section 2.3: ASR can make
the work more than three times faster. These improvements
might be due to the better performance of pretrained multilin-
gual speech models (e.g. Wav2Vec2 versus Kaldi), and to the
higher familiarity of the model to Polynesian languages (com-
pared to Ryukuan languages like Ikema, or smaller Austrone-
sian languages like Nasal, for example).
Overall, the ASR output provided a useful structural ba-
sis but still required extensive correction and partial reconstruc-
tion in many segments. Some recurring factors affecting cor-
rection time included (i) phonetic ambiguity in low-audibility
word endings, (ii) rapid speech due to naturalistic recordings,
(iii) occasional overlapping speech or environmental noise, and
(iv) lexical and grammatical ambiguities that required listening
verification. The L1 speaker who performed the transcription
reported being able to reconstruct intended forms adequately,
but also that careful listening was still necessary in many cases.
SP1’s recording was 74% faster to correct from the ASR
than to transcribe by hand. This recording is based on ques-
tion–answer exchanges about traditional dishes. The responses
are relatively short and less developed, and the speaker had to
be prompted often to continue. This resulted in a slower speech
rate and shorter segments. SP2’s recorgin was 243% faster to
correct than to transcribe manually. This recording, in contrast
to the first one, is a structured narrative of a past event. The
speaker is a language teacher, so the account is developed more
clearly and coherently. The speech in it is slower and well-
articulated, with less overlapping interaction compared to spon-
taneous biographical narratives.
We performed a final experiment with a third speaker,
where th