Multi-Speaker Embeddings With Weakly Supervised Speaker Activity
Detection For Granular Speaker Diarization
Jenthe Thienpondt ID ∗∗, Kris Demuynck ID
IDLab, Department of Electronics and Information Systems, Ghent University - imec, Belgium
jenthe.thienpondt@ugent.be, kris.demuynck@ugent.be
Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel weakly supervised multi-
speaker embedding model for extracting embeddings and cor-
responding frame-level voice and speaker activity from multi-
speaker utterances. The proposed model has two major ad-
vantages compared to traditional cascaded and hybrid end-to-
end diarization approaches. First, it removes the dependency
and computational overhead of external V AD and speaker seg-
mentation models in the diarization pipeline. Second, instead
of relying on coarse speaker boundaries derived from over-
lapping window embeddings, our approach provides frame-
level speaker boundaries for multiple speakers within each win-
dow, without relying on labeled frame-level training data. Our
proposed system achieves an average relative improvement of
13.7% in confusion error rate over our previous speaker di-
arization system across the AMI, V oxConverse and DIHARD
III benchmarks.
Index Terms: diarization, speaker embeddings, voice-activity
detection, speaker segmentation
1. Introduction
Speaker diarization addresses the question of “Who spoke
when?” in an audio recording. Traditional cascaded diarization
systems [1, 2] decompose the task into a sequence of subtasks:
voice activity detection (V AD), speaker embedding extraction
and speaker embedding clustering. Speaker assignment in cas-
caded diarization systems relies on clustering speaker embed-
dings extracted from overlapping sliding windows. However,
this only provides coarse speaker boundaries by relying on sim-
ple heuristics, typically by designating the speaker turn at the
midpoint of overlapping regions between adjacent windows at-
tributed to different speakers after clustering.
End-to-end diarization models [3, 4, 5] offer a promising al-
ternative by jointly optimizing these components within a uni-
fied framework. Crucially, end-to-end diarization attempts to
directly predict frame-level speaker activity, allowing for granu-
lar speaker boundaries without relying on the overlap-midpoint
heuristic of cascaded systems. However, end-to-end approaches
rely on sparsely available datasets with frame-level speaker ac-
tivity labels during training and their performance only remains
competitive with cascaded systems in constrained or limited
scenarios [6, 7].
To overcome these limitations, recent work has focused on
hybrid diarization systems [8, 9, 10] which first apply an end-
to-end diarization model on short windows to detected local-
ized voice and speaker activity, followed by a global clustering
stage using a speaker embedding extractor. The employment
**indicates the corresponding author.
of an end-to-end diarization model allows for granular speaker
boundaries due to its associated frame-level speaker activity
output while performing better on a wider range of scenarios
compared to standalone end-to-end models [11].
Recently, the development and integration of multi-speaker
embedding extractors in conjunction with hybrid diarization
models has proved promising for adapting traditional, singu-
lar embedding extractors for the multi-speaker diarization sce-
nario [12, 13]. Most promising is the usage of a multi-speaker
embedding model to extract embeddings guided by the out-
put of an external speaker segmentation model during training
and diarization [14, 15]. However, all these systems require
the training of both a (multi-)speaker embedding extractor and
an end-to-end diarization model, relying on difficult to obtain
frame-level voice and speaker activity labeled speech data.
To alleviate this issue, we propose a novel multi-speaker
embedding extraction model and corresponding weakly super-
vised training strategy which provides: (1) speaker-specific em-
beddings, (2) frame-level voice activity and (3) frame-level
speaker activity for a given multi-speaker utterance. Subse-
quently, we employ the embeddings and frame-level voice and
speaker activities in a cascaded diarization system, without re-
lying on an external V AD, speaker segmentation or end-to-
end diarization model. This greatly simplifies the diarization
pipeline, does not require frame-level voice and speaker activity
labels during training, while also providing the granular speaker
boundaries associated with current end-to-end and hybrid di-
arization approaches.
2. Multi-speaker embedding extractor
Our previous work suggests that by incorporating an attention
mechanism, a speaker embedding extractor can act as a weakly
supervised frame-level V AD model [16]. This provides the
opportunity to extract both the speaker embedding and corre-
sponding V AD activities from short windows in the initial di-
arization step using a single model. Building upon the same
principles, we introduce an additional attention module and cor-
responding weakly supervised training strategy for speaker ac-
tivity detection (SAD), indicating the speech frames for each
speaker separately in utterances containing multiple speakers.
2.1. Single-speaker pre-training
Our proposed approach starts by pre-training a speaker embed-
ding extractor with an attention mechanism on the regular (sin-
gle) speaker identification task. Pre-training is done for two rea-
sons. First, it ensures that the pre-pooling frame-level features
already contain localized speaker-identifying characteristics be-
fore training the speaker activity module, increasing training
stability. Second, by freezing the pre-pooling encoder and V AD
5292
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2471
Figure 1:Overview of our proposed multi-speaker fine-tuning stage with two speakers, frozen modules are indicated by gray hatching.
The fine-tuning only requires utterance-level speaker labels, resulting in a weakly supervised VAD and SAD training setup.
Figure 2:Architecture of voice activity detection (VAD) and
speaker activity detection (SAD) modules.
module after pre-training, the single-speaker embeddings are
unaffected by the subsequent multi-speaker fine-tuning step (see
Section 2.2).
During pre-training, we employ the same channel-attentive
attention mechanism as described in [16]. Specifically, the at-
tention module projects a pre-pooling frame-level featurehhht at
time steptto an attention scalare t,c for each channelc. Sub-
sequently, the average scalar valuev t = 1
C
PC
c=1et,c can be
interpreted as a frame-level V AD logit.
2.2. Multi-speaker fine-tuning
After pre-training, we freeze the pre-pooling encoder and V AD
module while introducing an additional speaker activity mod-
ule as depicted in Figure 1. The SAD module consists of two
bi-directional long-short term memory (BLSTM) layers which
projects each pre-pooling frame-level featurehhht to speaker ac-
tivity logitsssst as depicted in Figure 2. As our downstream di-
arization system uses only short extraction windows, the num-
ber of speakers is limited to two. Subsequently, we normalize
the sum ofs i
t andv t for each speakeriacross the temporal di-
mension using the softmax operation:
αi
t,c = exp(et,c +si
t)PT
τ exp(eτ,c +siτ)
.(1)
withα i
t,c indicating the speaker-specific attention scalar of
channelcfor framehhht. A major advantage of this approach is
that the downstream diarization system can use the original (sin-
gular) speaker embedding when only one speaker is detected
in the input by simply setting eachs i
t to 0 in Equation 1 (see
Section 3.2). Subsequently, the speaker-specific attentive mean
pooled statistic˜µi
c for channelccan now be calculated in a sim-
ilar manner as the single-speaker scenario:
˜µi
c =
TX
t
αi
t,cht,c.(2)
Correspondingly, the speaker-specific attentive standard devia-
tion˜σi
c for channelcis given by:
˜σi
c =
vuut
TX
t
αi
t,ch2
t,c−
 
˜µic
2
.(3)
The concatenation of ˜µµµi and ˜σσσi is subsequently projected to a
lower dimension using a linear layer to produce the speaker-
specific embeddingdddi.
We optimize our multi-speaker model by employing a per-
mutation invariant version of the popular additive angular mar-
gin (AAM) softmax loss function [17]. Specifically, the mini-
mum loss is calculated over all possible permutations perm(y)
of the ground-truth speaker class labelsypresent in the input
utterance:
L(D,y) = min
perm(y)
LAAM(D,perm(y))(4)
withDrepresenting the speaker embeddings. Notice that the
loss function given in Equation 4 only depends on utterance-
level speaker labels, resulting in the frame-level V AD and SAD
module being trained in a weakly supervised manner.
3. Multi-speaker diarization
Our proposed multi-speaker embedding model provides sev-
eral advantages over single-speaker embedding models typi-
cally employed in cascaded diarization systems. First, the
model concurrently provides V AD logits, speaker activity log-
its and distinct embeddings for all speakers present within an
extraction window, greatly reducing computational complexity.
Second, it simplifies the diarization pipeline by eliminating the
requirement for external V AD and speaker segmentation mod-
els relying on frame-labeled speech data during training. Fi-
nally, the provided speaker activations can be employed for sig-
nificantly more granular speaker boundaries compared to the
5293
Figure 3:Weakly supervised VAD, SAD and final diarization
example output of extraction windows with two speakers. On
the left the baseline fails to detect the blue speaker due to the
orange speaker reappearing in the following overlapping ex-
traction window. On the right the blue speaker is detected but
only a coarse speaker turn is given due to the overlap-midpoint
heuristic. The proposed MSFT strategy rectifies both mistakes.
coarse overlap-midpoint heuristic in traditional cascaded sys-
tems. In this section, we propose a computationally efficient
speaker diarization system based on our previously described
multi-speaker embedding extractor.
3.1. Integrated voice activity detection
First, our proposed diarization system extracts all pre-pooling
frame-level featuresh t along with their corresponding V AD
logitvt, similar to [16]. Subsequently, we determine continuous
speech segments by employing a thresholdv t≥λ vad. Follow-
ing standard diarization procedure, segments separated by less
thanλmer seconds are merged while segments shorter thanλdel
seconds are discarded.
3.2. Integrated speaker activity detection
For each remaining continuous speech segment, we calculate
the speaker activity logitsα t and corresponding speaker em-
beddingsDin a sliding window fashion, starting from the al-
ready extracted frame-level features. To determine if the extrac-
tion window contains one or two speakers, we calculate the co-
sine similarity between the speaker embeddings inDand com-
pare it to the thresholdλ sim. Ifcos(d 0,d 1)≥λ sim, we extract
and assign the corresponding single-speaker embedding to the
extraction window by settingsi
t to 0 in Equation 1. Conversely,
whencos(d 0,d 1)< λsim, we split the extraction window into
continuous speech windows of each distinct speaker, based on
the maximum speaker activity value inαt for each frame. Sub-
sequently, we assign the speaker embeddings inDto their cor-
responding speech windows.
3.3. Speaker clustering
Similar to traditional cascaded diarization, the speaker labels
for each window are subsequently determined using an unsuper-
vised clustering algorithm (e.g. spectral clustering [18] or ag-
glomerative hierarchical clustering [19]) on the corresponding
speaker embeddings. However, our multi-speaker embedding
extraction step provides additional benefits during the cluster-
ing phase. Primarily, the speaker embeddings should be less
noisy by avoiding embeddings based on speech segments con-
taining multiple speakers. In addition, false negatives result-
ing fromcos(d 0,d 1)can be corrected in the clustering phase
by mapping the corresponding embeddings to the same label.
Correspondingly, false positives can be corrected by applying
the overlap-midpoint heuristic after clustering, at the cost of
speaker boundary granularity. Empirically, this error-correcting
behavior (see Figure 3) results in robust performance, even
when employing higher (less strict)λ sim thresholds.
4. Experimental setup
4.1. Training and diarization configuration
For evaluation, we use our previously proposed ECAPA2 [20]
speaker embedding extractor and follow the same training and
augmentation procedure for single-speaker pre-training. How-
ever, we removed the squeeze-excitation (SE) layers during
fine-tuning, as their global statistics were found to interfere with
training the SAD module. The training data consists of the
development partitions of the V oxCeleb2 [21] and Mutilingual
LibriSpeech (MLS) [22] datasets. The MLS dataset is included
to allow for creating artificial training utterances with speaker
changes while maintaining uniform background conditions.
For the multi-speaker fine-tuning stage, we add the SAD
module while freezing the pre-pooling and V AD layers as de-
scribed in Section 2.2. During fine-tuning, the total length of
each training utterance is 4 seconds with half of the utterances
containing a single speaker and the remaining half containing
two speakers. For the multi-speaker utterances, we concatenate
two randomly cropped utterances of different speakers with the
relative duration of each speaker being determined by sampling
from a uniform distribution. The model is updated using our
permutation-invariant version of the AAM-softmax loss func-
tion given in Equation 4 with a margin penalty of 0.2. A batch
size of 128 is used for both pre-training and fine-tuning.
We employ our trained multi-speaker embedding model in
the diarization system described in Section 3. Speaker embed-
dings are extracted with a window length of 2 seconds and a
hop length of 1 second. For our baseline ECAPA2 system, we
setλ sim =−1. For our proposed ECAPA2 + MSFT system,
theλ sim hyperparameter is determined using the development
partitions of the diarization benchmarks. Subsequently, spec-
tral clustering is employed following the same protocol as [16].
The number of speakersnis estimated using the eigengap cri-
terion [18]. Remaining consecutive overlapping windows as-
signed to different speakers are resolved using the overlap-
midpoint heuristic.
4.2. Evaluation protocol
We evaluate the performance of our proposed method on the
AMI [23], V oxConverse [24], and DIHARD III [25] diariza-
tion benchmarks. The AMI corpus comprises meeting record-
ings, V oxConverse includes multi-speaker audio sourced from
YouTube and DIHARD III features a diverse set of challenging
domains. For AMI, we report results of the headset partition
and adopt the standard evaluation protocol described in [26],
using the ”Full-corpus-ASR partition” while excluding TNO
meetings from both development and test sets. Diarization er-
ror rates (DERs) are computed on non-overlapping speech seg-
ments, using a forgiveness collar of 0.25 seconds. For V oxCon-
verse and DIHARD III, we follow the official evaluation proto-
5294
Table 1:DER breakdown in VAD and confusion error rates of
our proposed diarization system and other reported results.
System AMI VoxConv DIH III
V AD CNF V AD CNF V AD CNF
ECAPA-TDNN [26] 0.0 4.0 – – – –
TitaNet-L [28] 0.0 1.9 – – – –
DR-DESA [29] – – 1.6 2.8 9.5 5.5
ECAPA2 [16] 0.0 1.4 1.6 2.2 9.5 4.6
ECAPA2 (ours) 0.0 1.3 1.6 2.2 9.5 4.7
ECAPA2 + MSFT (ours) 0.01.2 1.61.9 9.54.0
Table 2:Confusion error rate on all DIHARD III subdomains
of our baseline ECAPA2 and proposed MSFT strategy.
Domain Speakers ECAPA2 +MSFT∆(%)
DIHARD III 3.7 4.68 3.96−15.38
CTS 2.0 2.62 1.79−31.68
Clinical 2.0 3.12 2.23−28.53
Socio-lab 2.0 1.53 1.21−20.92
Socio-field 2.3 2.80 2.33−16.79
Court 7.3 0.99 0.83−16.16
Maptask 2.0 0.54 0.46−14.81
Broadcast 7.5 2.40 2.12−11.67
Webvideo 4.1 20.70 20.38−1.55
Audiobooks 1.0 0.00 0.000.00
Meeting 3.9 8.82 8.94+1.36
Restaurant 6.4 12.98 13.25+2.08
cols, scoring all speech regions with collar values of 0.25 and
0 seconds, respectively. Since the V AD mechanism and asso-
ciated performance [16] is identical to our previous system, all
included and reported results use oracle V AD but no ground-
truth speaker count to isolate the impact of our MSFT strategy.
As our method does not currently model overlapping speech,
performance on V oxConverse and DIHARD III is penalized ac-
cordingly. The DER is subdivided into V AD (false alarm and
missed detection) and confusion (CNF) error rates.
The V ox1-O test set [27] is employed to report singular
speaker verification performance. Furthermore, we construct a
custom two-speaker evaluation set, V ox1-M, by replacing a con-
secutive segment of each original V ox1-O utterance with speech
of another V ox1-O speaker, mimicking a speaker turn. The pro-
portion of speech attributed to the original speaker relative to
the interfering speaker is sampled from a uniform distribution
over the interval [0.1, 0.9]. If one speaker is detected, a singu-
lar embedding is extracted by settings i
t = 0. Otherwise, two
embeddings are extracted based on the SAD logits. The num-
ber of speakers is either given (oracle) or estimated (est) based
on the thresholdλ sim tuned on the development partition of the
V oxConverse dataset. The maximum cosine similarity over all
embeddings in a trial determines the equal error rate (EER).
5. Results
Table 1 depicts the performance of our proposed system with
the currently best published results of comparable systems on
the AMI, V oxConverse and DIHARD III diarization bench-
marks. A direct comparison with most end-to-end diarization
Table 3:Ablation study of our MSFT strategy. EER (Vox1-O,
Vox1-M) and confusion error rate (DIH III) are reported.
Vox1-O Vox1-M DIH IIISystem oracle est oracle est est
ECAPA2 + MSFT 0.55 0.57 5.85 6.57 3.96
A. no MSFT 0.53 – 23.01 – 4.68
B. with SE 0.51 0.79 6.45 7.45 4.42
C. no MLS 0.56 0.58 5.89 6.62 4.19
D. no freezing 0.96 1.11 6.36 7.12 4.92
E. no pre-training 1.11 1.17 8.72 10.03 5.21
systems is difficult, since these usually depend on the training
partitions of the diarization benchmarks, introducing a bias to-
wards the test results on those benchmarks. Therefore, we only
include results of non-fusion, single-scale systems which are
not optimized directly on the training partitions of the bench-
marks for a fair comparison. Our proposed MSFT strategy
outperforms our ECAPA2 baseline and other systems on all
test sets with an average relative improvement of 13.7% over
the best results, indicating that the granular speaker bound-
aries and corresponding interference-reduced speaker embed-
dings improves diarization robustness.
Table 2 shows the confusion rates on the subdomains of
the DIHARD III benchmark for our ECAPA2 system with and
without MSFT. The largest improvements are gained on do-
mains with relatively clean background conditions such as tele-
phone speech (CTS). We suspect this is due to the lack of realis-
tic speaker changes with significant overlap in our training strat-
egy, which would more closely resemble the speaker changes in
challenging domains such as speaker switching in a restaurant.
Notably, performance never significantly degrades with MSFT
enabled, making it widely applicable.
An ablation study of our proposed system is shown in Ta-
ble 3. Our proposed ECAPA2 + MSFT system preserves reg-
ular, single speaker verification performance in the oracle sce-
nario, as shown by a model trained without the MSFT step in ex-
periment A. Notably, our system only has a minor degradation
in the estimated scenario. Experiment B shows the interference
of global statistics when using SE layers in multi-speaker mod-
els with an average relative degradation of 10.5% on V ox1-M.
The importance of clean data for creating more realistic artifi-
cial speaker turns is shown by experiment C. Without freezing
the ECAPA2 backbone during the MSFT step, single speaker
verification performance is severely degraded, as shown in ex-
periment D. Finally, we trained the multi-speaker architecture
as shown in Figure 2 from scratch in experiment E. However,
this resulted in severe performance impact on both singular and
multi-speaker verification.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a novel weakly supervised train-
ing method for a multi-speaker embedding model to simultane-
ously extract frame-level voice and speaker activity with cor-
responding embeddings from multi-speaker utterances. In ad-
dition, we presented an efficient diarization pipeline based on
our multi-speaker embedding model which provides granular
speaker boundaries without relying on external V AD, speaker
segmentation or end-to-end diarization models.
5295
7. Acknowledgments
This work is supported by Research Foundation Flanders
(FWO) grant S004923N.
8. Generative AI use disclosure
This work was completed without the use of generative AI tools.
9. References
[1] Z. Li, Y . Lin, X. Qin, N. Jiang, G. Zhao, and M. Li, “The dku-msxf
speaker verification system for the voxceleb speaker recognition
challenge 2023,”VoxCeleb Speaker Recognition Challenge 2023
Workshop, 2023.
[2] G. K. Davit Karamyan, “The krisp diarization system for the
voxceleb speaker recognition challenge 2023,”VoxCeleb Speaker
Recognition Challenge 2023 Workshop, 2023.
[3] Y . Fujita, N. Kanda, S. Horiguchi, K. Nagamatsu, and S. Watan-
abe, “End-to-End Neural Speaker Diarization with Permutation-
free Objectives,” inProc. INTERSPEECH 2019, 2019, pp. 4300–
4304.
[4] Y . Fujita, N. Kanda, S. Horiguchi, Y . Xue, K. Nagamatsu, and
S. Watanabe, “End-to-end neural speaker diarization with self-
attention,” in2019 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Un-
derstanding Workshop (ASRU), 2019, pp. 296–303.
[5] F. Landini, M. Diez, A. Lozano-Diez, and L. Burget, “Multi-
speaker and wide-band simulated conversations as training data
for end-to-end neural diarization,” inICASSP 2023, 2023, pp. 1–
5.
[6] F. Landini, A. Lozano-Diez, M. Diez, and L. Burget, “From Sim-
ulated Mixtures to Simulated Conversations as Training Data for
End-to-End Neural Diarization,” inProc. INTERSPEECH 2022,
2022, pp. 5095–5099.
[7] S. Horiguchi, Y . Fujita, S. Watanabe, Y . Xue, and K. Nagamatsu,
“End-to-end speaker diarization for an unknown number of speak-
ers with encoder-decoder based attractors,” inProceedings of the
21st Annual Conference of the International Speech Communica-
tion Association (INTERSPEECH 2020), 2020, pp. 269–273.
[8] K. Kinoshita, M. Delcroix, and N. Tawara, “Integrating end-to-
end neural and clustering-based diarization: Getting the best of
both worlds,” in2021 IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2021, pp. 7198–
7202.
[9] ——, “Advances in integration of end-to-end neural and
clustering-based diarization for real conversational speech,”
inProceedings of Interspeech 2021, 2021, pp. 3565–3569,
arXiv:2105.09040.
[10] A. Plaquet and H. Bredin, “Powerset multi-class cross entropy
loss for neural speaker diarization,” inInterspeech 2023, 2023,
pp. 3222–3226.
[11] K. Kinoshita, M. Delcroix, and N. Tawara, “Advances in integra-
tion of end-to-end neural and clustering-based diarization for real
conversational speech,” inProceedings of Interspeech 2021, 2021,
pp. 3565–3569, arXiv:2105.09040.
[12] S. Horiguchi, A. Ando, T. Moriya, T. Ashihara, H. Sato,
N. Tawara, and M. Delcroix, “Recursive attentive pool-
ing for extracting speaker embeddings from multi-speaker
recordings,”2024 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Work-
shop (SLT), pp. 1201–1208, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:272310037
[13] S. Horiguchi, A. Ando, N. Tawara, and M. Delcroix, “Pretraining
Multi-Speaker Identification for Neural Speaker Diarization,” in
Interspeech 2025, 