Emergence of Phonetic Representations in EMG-based Silent Speech
Interfaces
Guillaume Toussaint1, Deborah Pereg1, Kevin Scheck3, Tanja Schultz3, J¨urgen Schmidhuber1,4,
Michael Wand1,2
1 SUPSI, Istituto Dalle Molle di studi sull’intelligenza artificiale (IDSIA), Lugano, Switzerland
2 SUPSI, Institute for Digital Technologies for Personalized Healthcare (MeDiTech), Lugano,
Switzerland
3 Cognitive Systems Lab, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany
4 KAUST Center of Generative AI, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{guillaume.toussaint,deborah.pereg,michael.wand}@idsia.ch,
{scheck,tanja.schultz}@uni-bremen.de, juergen.schmidhuber@kaust.edu.sa
Abstract
In this work, we investigate learned representations of a surface
EMG-based silent speech interface trained for different tasks
(speech synthesis, recognition, phone classification, unsuper-
vised pretraining). We show that such systems develop pho-
netic representations even without explicit supervision, that in-
corporating a regression loss on acoustic targets is essential for
producing intelligible synthetic speech, and we show that self-
supervised contrastive learning alone results in a latent space
which does not yield measurable improvements in speech syn-
thesis or phone classification tasks.
Index Terms: EMG, silent speech, speech synthesis, ASR, self-
supervised learning
1. Introduction
There is a rising interest in developing new methods for silent
speech interfaces, i.e., devices that allow users to speak without
the need for an acoustic signal [1, 2, 3]. These interfaces
decode articulatory movements, such as those captured via
surface electromyography (EMG) [4, 5], ultrasonic sensing
[6], electro-corticography (ECoG) [7] or ultra wide-band
radar technology [8], into text or speech, offering potential
applications in speech restoration and private communica-
tions. Efforts have recently been made in EMG-based silent
speech interfaces, allowing for both increased naturalness
of speech and near real-time processing: Scheck et al. [9]
describe a multi-user speech synthesizer that uses a pretrained
voice-conversion model based on soft speech units [10]; in
[11], the authors perform EMG to speech conversion with
extremely low latency; in [12] and [13] diffusion models are
used to enhance the naturalness of synthetic speech. However,
a common issue with such EMG-based systems is the lack of
annotated data. Datasets in open-access are limited, and vary
in configurations. For instance, the UKA corpus [14] contains
8 hours of recording from 8 speakers with 6 electrodes, but
is only partially available online; [15] uses 8 electrodes to
record 18.6 hours of voiced and unvoiced speech from a
single speaker; the CSL-EMG Array corpus [16] uses a 40
electrodes setup and contains around 10 hours of data from
8 speakers. All of these are far from the immense size of
commonly used speech recognition and synthesis datasets like
Librispeech [17] and its 960 hours of training data. To address
data scarcity issues in EMG to speech datasets, techniques
such as self-active learning [18] and training using confidence
measures and synthetic EMG data [19] have been introduced to
reduce the effort needed to produce labeled data. Concurrently,
self-supervised learning (SSL) [20, 21, 22, 23] techniques,
such as Contrastive Predictive Coding (CPC) [24] or HUBERT
[25] have emerged, thus reducing the cost of annotating data
for model training while demonstrating of good performance at
downstream tasks.
Previous work applied self-supervised contrastive learning
to EMG data, and achieved improvements in the speech
recognition task [26]. Improvements appear even in data-scarce
settings for speech recognition, but marginally so for speech
synthesis and phone classification. Following this line of work,
we aim to provide an empirical understanding of the learned
representations of models developed in previous work, by
focusing on intelligibility and phonetic content, using linear
probing [27, 28] to assess the quality of features produced by
trained EMG-based models.
In this work, we demonstrate the emergence of linearly sep-
arable phonetic representations in latent space, even when our
model is trained for a task that does not include phonetic infor-
mation, such as speech synthesis and speech recognition from
EMG data. We show that the previous pretraining attempts us-
ing self-supervised contrastive learning may have failed due to
this pretraining method learning a seemingly unrelated latent
space.
2. Experimental setup
We use the dataset introduced by Gaddy & Klein in [15], an
18.6 hours dataset of aligned EMG-audio pairs and unvoiced
EMG recordings from a single speaker. There are 12 hours
of voiced utterances, for which EMG and audio data are
recorded simultaneously. Audio targets are Mel-frequency
spectrograms computed from the raw audio, while phones are
aligned with speech using the Montreal Forced Aligner [29].
The remaining 6 hours consist of both unvoiced and voiced
utterances that use the same text. For unvoiced recordings,
predicted mel-spectrograms and phones are aligned with their
voiced counterpart using Dynamic Time Warping [30], to
enable training on silent utterances.
The architecture used is a neural network consisting of
4837
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2499
3 residual convolutional blocks[31, 32], followed by 12 con-
former blocks [33] and a linear layer. Each setup is trained on
an RTX 3090 for a total of 64 epochs using the AdamW opti-
mizer, with a weight decay of10−2 and a learning rate of10−3
for speech and phone classification, and10−4 for EMG-to-text.
Pretraining lasts for 1000 epochs, with a learning rate of10 −6
and weight decay of10−3. All hyperparameters have been cho-
sen to match experiments in previous work [26].
We assess the representations of models trained on four
tasks:
• EMG-to-speech: Mel-spectrogram prediction from EMG,
trained with frame-wise Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss
LMSE
• EMG-to-phones: phone classification from EMG, trained
with cross-entropy lossL CE
• EMG-to-speech&phones: joint prediction of Mel-
spectrogram and phones (multi-task). Training uses a
combined objectiveL= (1−λ phones)LMSE +λ phonesLCE
• EMG-to-text: speech recognition from EMG, trained with
Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) loss [34] for
character output.
We train models for each of the four tasks described
above. We also perform unsupervised pretraining of EMG
representations using emg2vec [26], followed by finetuning
for EMG-to-text and EMG-to-speech&phones. An additional
randomly initialized baseline is also provided for comparison.
To quantify the quality of the extracted phonetic informa-
tion, we use linear probing [27, 28], which, together with
k-Nearest-Neighbors, have been shown to be on average the
best predictor of downstream performance on a classification
task [28]. The core rationale behind using linear probing as
a tool to evaluate representations is that if a representation
has learned to encode fundamental linguistic structures like
phonetics, this information should be linearly accessible to
a simple classifier. High performance with a linear probe
indicates that the phonetic features are already well-separated
and linearly decodable in the latent space, and thus is a measure
of the representation’s phonetic content and a property highly
desirable for downstream tasks. So far, the method has almost
exclusively been used for classification; in this study we
introduce the use of linear probing for speech synthesis, i.e for
the desired regression output. Thus, for each setup, we train a
linear classifier to classify phones, and a linear regressor to get
mel-spectrograms, from extracted features.
Pretraining is carried out as follows: latent speech rep-
resentationsz 1,z 2,...,z T , forTtime steps, are extracted by
the convolutional parts of the model. A quantized representa-
tionq 1,q 2,...,q T of these features is computed using product
quantization [35]. A proportionp= 0.2of the feature encoder
outputs is masked, and passed through the conformer layers.
Finally, a linear head gives a predictionc t for each time step
that is compared to the corresponding targetq t. The following
contrastive loss [36] is used:
L(ct) =−log
 exp

sim(ct,q t)/τ

P
qn̸=qt exp

sim(qn,q t)/τ

!
withτ= 0.2a temperature parameter,sim(a,b) = aT b
∥a∥∥b∥ ,
andq n a set of 100 negatives samples taken from other
quantized features.
The intelligibility of produced speech is assessed by using a
pretrained Wav2Vec2 speech recognition model to compute the
word error rate (WER) of the recognized output. We also pro-
vide UMAP [37] visualizations of the features for each setup’s
training data. For readability, we limit visualizations to five
phones which represent distinct articulatory patterns.
3. Results
Table 1 shows results for linear probing on phone classifica-
tion for each of our 8 setups. Considering that phones in the
dataset are highly imbalanced and annotations consist mostly
of silences, we also report the results without considering silent
frames in the accuracy. Both cases are referred to as Sil and
No sil. Given that the trend is similar, subsequent results are
presented with silences included.
Table 1:Linear probing accuracy (%) for phone classification
Setup Sil (%) No sil (%)
Pretrained 37.56 4.45
Random 38.46 4.24
EMG-to-text (supervised) 80.57 49.26
EMG-to-text (finetuned) 76.87 45.80
EMG-to-speech&phones (supervised)84.29 52.84
EMG-to-speech&phones (finetuned)84.68 52.74
EMG-to-speech (λphones = 0) 74.57 43.48
EMG-to-phones (λphones = 1) 75.35 45.43
We make the following observations: the best performing
setup is the EMG-to-speech&phones setup, with an accuracy
around 84%. As noted in previous work [38], the use of a mixed
regression and classification loss is beneficial for the synthesis
task. We report here that it also shows improved classification
accuracy on phones. We also observe a similarity in perfor-
mance between supervised training and finetuning, in the EMG-
to-speech&phones cases. For EMG-to-text setups, we see a
small difference between the supervised and finetuned systems.
Interestingly, despite being useful for the actual EMG-to-
text task [26], the accuracy of the pretrained model is relatively
low, indicating that SSL, in this case, does not extract the fea-
tures that are necessary for phone classification, and that classes
learned during pretraining differ semantically. This idea is re-
inforced by the UMAP visualization in Figure 1, which shows
that features do not seem to form clusters based on phones.
Surprisingly, we note that the EMG-to-speech setup, a
model trained only to reproduce audio coefficients yields fea-
tures that can be used to accurately classify phones. To explore
learned representations more in detail, we also provide in Table
2 the accuracy for the last 5 layers of the encoder in a separate
experiment1.
As can be seen in Table 2, features extracted from earlier
layers in the EMG-to-speech setup tend to contain separable
phonetic information, emerging despite the absence of it in the
training objective, and perform better than features from the last
layer. Remarkably, probing earlier layers in this setup yields a
better accuracy than in the EMG-to-phones setup, suggesting
that by training a model on speech synthesis, intermediate fea-
tures are more general and better suited for phone classification.
1In Table 2, EMG-to-speech&phones is abridged to EMG-to-s&p
4838
Figure 1:UMAP projection of features after pretraining
Table 2:Linear probing accuracy (%) across encoder layers.
Layer index 8 9 10 11 12
EMG-to-text (supervised) 76.52 78.06 79.23 80.2680.55
EMG-to-text (finetuned) 72.93 73.99 75.2176.92 76.92
EMG-to-s&p (supervised) 79.69 81.89 83.81 84.0184.10
EMG-to-s&p (finetuned) 79.00 80.94 83.01 84.0184.27
EMG-to-speech 79.44 79.6380.0879.21 74.54
EMG-to-phones 75.22 76.43 77.1577.7375.23
In other setups, accuracy increases consistently the deeper we
probe.
(a) EMG-to-phones features
 (b) EMG-to-speech features
Figure 2:UMAP representations for EMG-to-speech and EMG-
to-phones
Furthermore, we compare in Figure 2 representations of
EMG-to-phones and EMG-to-speech features on a subset of
phones, and show the presence of clusters in the feature space.
Another interesting observation is that the EMG-to-text setups
extract features that are semantically aligned with phones, de-
spite not being part of the CTC training objective. We provide
an additional visualization that show the emergence of clusters
in EMG-to-text models as well in Figure 3. Interestingly, the
performance is better than EMG-to-speech and EMG-to-phones
setups.
Table 3 presents the MSE and WER when probing for
speech synthesis. As can be observed lower MSE score is corre-
lated with a lower WER. Moreover, WER increases by a large
margin for every setup that did not includeL M SE as part of
the training objective, indicating that for a given set of features,
(a) EMG-to-text (supervised)
 (b) EMG-to-text (finetuned)
Figure 3:UMAP representations for EMG-to-text, supervised
and finetuned
phone classification accuracy is not indicative of intelligibility
in synthesized speech. The EMG-to-phones setup did not yield
features that align with the synthesis task.
Table 3:Linear probing metrics for speech synthesis
Setup MSE WER (%)
Pretrained 1.19 98.18
Random 1.22 98.34
EMG-to-text (supervised) 1.03 95.02
EMG-to-text (finetuned) 1.03 95.91
EMG-to-speech&phones (supervised) 0.7935.99
EMG-to-speech&phones (finetuned) 0.8035.26
EMG-to-speech (λphones = 0)0.7839.63
EMG-to-phones (λphones = 1) 1.10 100
Finally, we provide a visualization of features similarity
for each setup using Linear Central Kernel Alignment (CKA)
[39], a method used to measure similarity between neural em-
beddings, in Figure 4. We chose a linear kernel over non-linear
kernels for interpretability and ease of reproduction. Non-linear
kernels have been tested, and yield similar results. A high sim-
ilarity is present between features from finetuned models and
their supervised counterparts, which may explain the similar-
ity we observe in the results. It is also shown that embed-
dings learned during pretraining seem to differ significantly
from other setups. Additionally, the EMG-to-phones features
differ, although not by much, compared to EMG-to-speech fea-
tures, reflecting our previous observation that training solely for
phone classification is not sufficient for speech synthesis.
4. Conclusion
In this paper, we empirically demonstrated the emergence of
phonetic features in EMG-based speech synthesis and speech
recognition systems, even when the training objective does not
involve phones. We showed that such features can yield a better
classification accuracy compared to a baseline system trained
only on phone prediction. We evaluated the previous claim in
[26] that pretraining does not help much in speech synthesis
and phone classification, and we hypothesize the possible ex-
planations for this failure: classes extracted during contrastive
pretraining on EMG data are not semantically aligned with
neither phonetic nor acoustic information. Alternatively, this
contrastive pretraining method may not be adequate for our
downstream tasks, or the dataset may not be large enough
to make phonetic information emerge with conventional
pretraining. We also showed that in this setup, a regression loss
4839
Figure 4:Similarity of features between setup pairs
is necessary to achieve intelligibility in synthetic speech.
Future work involves exploring the implicit classes learned
from the EMG data with different SSL techniques, to discover
what is actually learned, and if we can steer those classes closer
to those learned with supervised learning in order to further
lessen the need for annotated data. Also, given that our ob-
servations are made on a single-speaker dataset with a limited
amount of data, our claim of emergence needs to be verified in
larger multi-speaker datasets.
5. Compliance with ethical standards
This work has been conducted on electromyographic data made
available in open access by Gaddy and Klein [15], and did not
require ethical approval.
6. Acknowledgments
This research is funded by the Swiss National Science Founda-
tion (SNSF, grant number 200021L200773) and by the German
Research Foundation (DFG, grant number 460884988) through
the project “MyV oice: Myoelectric V ocal Interaction and Com-
munication Engine”.
7. Use of Generative AI Disclosure
Generative AI tools have been used solely for polishing parts of
the manuscript. They were not used at any point when working
on the experiments described in this paper.