Deepfake Word Detection by Next-token Prediction using Fine-tuned Whisper
Hoan My Tran ID 1,∗, Xin Wang ID 2,∗, Wanying Ge ID 2, Xuechen Liu ID 2, Junichi Yamagishi ID 2
1 Universit´e de Rennes, France. 2 National Institute of Informatics, Japan
hoan.tran@irisa.fr, wangxin@nii.ac.jp
Abstract
Deepfake speech utterances can be forged by replacing one or
more words in a bona fide utterance with semantically differ-
ent words synthesized with speech-generative models. While a
dedicated synthetic word detector could be developed, we de-
veloped a cost-effective method that fine-tunes a pre-trained
Whisper model to detect synthetic words while transcribing
the input utterance via next-token prediction. We further in-
vestigate using partially vocoded utterances as the fine-tuning
data, thus reducing the cost of data collection. Our experiments
demonstrate that, on in-domain test data, the fine-tuned Whisper
yields low synthetic-word detection error rates and transcription
error rates. On out-of-domain test data with synthetic words
produced with unseen speech-generative models, the fine-tuned
Whisper remains on par with a dedicated ResNet-based detec-
tion model; however, the overall performance degradation calls
for strategies to improve its generalization capability.
Index Terms: speech anti-spoofing, deepfake detection, speech
recognition, deep learning
1. Introduction
Detecting deepfake speech utterances, which are not uttered by
a real speaker but synthesized by a speech-generative model,
is now a well-established topic with numerous publications
on detector architectures [1], [2], feature engineering [3], [4],
datasets, and competitions [5], [6], [7]. Beyond simply detect-
ing whether an input utterance is synthetic (i.e., deepfake or
forged with any synthesis model), an emerging task is to de-
tectwhich part of the input utterance is synthetic. Solutions are
needed to counter advanced manipulations that alter part of a
bona fide (i.e., human-uttered real) utterance, for example, by
swapping bona fide words with synthetic ones.1Such manipula-
tion can be conducted using traditional audio forgery methods
(e.g., slicing) or more advanced deep-neural-network (DNN)-
based generative models [9]. The latter case is known to pro-
duce synthetic content with less discernible artifacts [10].
Detecting the synthetic part of an utterance is more com-
plicated than deciding whether the utterance is (partially) syn-
thetic. For the latter, the detector has to produce a sequence of
decisions (or scores that indicate the likelihood of being bona
fide), rather than a single binary decision of synthetic or not.
Accordingly, a sequential classification model can be imple-
mented by sophisticating a binary deepfake speech detector,
e.g., extracting sequential latent features from a DNN-based
*These authors contributed equally.
1As an official example of the V oiceCraft system by Meta, the origi-
nal speech ‘governments don’t controlthings’ was manipulated to ‘gov-
ernments don’t controlmoney directly’ [8].
Whisper
Fine-tuning using partially vocoded data
Inference by next-
token prediction
My textbook
Vocoder
My <TOF>textbook<EOF>
This is a<TOF>good<EOF> example! 
add 
tokens
Vocoded 
training 
data Deepfake audio with a 
synthetic word 
wav:
tokens:
Figure 1:Illustration of fine-tuned Whisper for speech-to-text
transcription and synthetic word detection.<TOF>and<EOF>
denote tokens surrounding synthetic word.
detector and transforming them via additional recurrent lay-
ers [11], a boundary-matching map [12], or attention [13].
In contrast to the above studies, we seek more cost-efficient
solutions to locate the synthetic content in the input utterance.
This is motivated by the fact that DNN-based models require a
full-fledged development flow, including data curation, model
designing, model training, and hyper-parameter tuning. Adding
a trained model to a speech-data processing system also requires
additional computation and storage resources. To avoid cost,
we explore solutions that add synthetic word detection as an
additional function to existing models, particularly automatic
speech recognition (ASR) models.
In this paper, we investigatewhether we can fine-tune a pre-
trained ASR model, i.e., Whisper [14], so that it can detect syn-
thetic words while transcribing the input utterance.2 To address
this research question, we present a fine-tuning method that re-
quires only a minimum change—adding specific tokens to the
training data, which is illustrated in Figure 1. This avoids the
costs of implementing a new training algorithm or deploying a
separate fake detector. To reduce the cost of training-data cura-
tion, we also investigate the use of the training data that contains
‘simulated’ synthetic words created with vocoders.
As far as the authors are aware, this is the first study to aug-
ment Whisper with the function of synthetic word detection. 3
Our experiments demonstrate promising results. On test sets
with data from the same domain as the training data, the fine-
tuned Whisper performed on par with a dedicated ResNet model
in terms of synthetic word detection, while its text transcription
accuracy did not degrade. On test sets with words synthesized
with advanced DNN-based generative models, the fine-tuned
Whisper degraded to varying degrees in terms of synthetic word
detection and transcription. Further analysis investigates how
the fine-tuned Whisper is affected by the domain mismatch be-
tween fine-tuning and test data. Improving the out-of-domain
detection performance is to be addressed in future work.
2The term ‘synthetic word’ refers to a waveform segment that corre-
sponds to a word, but its waveform signal is synthesized with a model.
3github.com/nii-yamagishilab/Whisper-deepfake-word-detection
1042
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-628
2. Methods
2.1. Deepfake word detection via next-token prediction
Let a speech waveform bex1:N withNdenoting the total num-
ber of samples, wherex n ∈Ris the amplitude value at the
n-th sampling point,n∈[1, N]. As an ASR model, Whis-
per uses an encoder-decoder Transformer structure and converts
x1:N into a sequence ofMtokensy 1:M , wherein each token
ym (m∈{1, . . . , M}) usually corresponds to a subword text
unit and belongs to a finite setYpre-defined by a tokenizer.
Conceptually, synthetic word detection involves converting
x1:N into another sequence of tagsc 1:M , where eachc m ∈
{REAL,FAKE}. A na ¨ıve implementation is to add another clas-
sification head so that Whisper mapsx 1:N →y 1:M×c 1:M ,
but it requires a change in the model architecture and hyper-
parameter tuning (e.g., weights for ASR and detection losses).
Our proposed method, illustrated in Figure 1, blends syn-
thetic word detection and text transcription intoa single next-
token prediction task. Fine-tuning Whisper only requires a
minimal change to the tokens of the fine-tuning data. Sup-
pose that we have pairs of speech utterances and their text
transcriptions{x 1:N ,y 1:M}, wherein each speech utterance
contains one or more synthetic words. Assuming that thei-
th token belongs to a synthetic word, we insert two tokens
<TOF>and<EOF>aroundy i to obtain a new token sequence
ˆy1:M ={y 1,···,<TOF>, y i,<EOF>,···, y M}. We now
fine-tune Whisper using pairs of{x 1:N ,ˆy1:M}, without any
change to the model architecture or fine-tuning algorithm. In-
ference is executed in the same way as the original Whisper.
Given an output sequence of tokens, any token between a pair
of<TOF>and<EOF>is flagged as synthetic.
Note that, for{<TOF>,<EOF>}, if we add two new tokens
toY, we need to add additional embedding vectors to Whisper.
We thus do not introduce new tokens but simply reuse two exist-
ing tokens fromYthat are unlikely to be used for the ASR task.
While other choices are possible, we use the tokens ‘!!!!!!’
and ‘∼∼∼’ as the<TOF>and<EOF>, respectively.
2.2. Using vocoded data for fine-tuning Whisper
A common approach to prepare the training data{x 1:N ,ˆy1:M}
is to use diverse speech-generative models to synthesize the se-
lected words, which requires extra text or source audio input.
To simplify the data-curation pipeline, we are inspired by [15]
and use vocoders to create simulated synthetic words. Given a
pair of{x 1:N ,y 1:M}, we use WhisperX to obtain word-level
alignment [16]. We then randomly select one to five words,
conduct copy-synthesis [15] on their corresponding waveform
segments via a vocoder, and replace the segments in the orig-
inal waveform with the vocoded versions. This process only
requires extracting the acoustic features (e.g., mel spectrogram)
and resynthesizing the waveform. The vocoded waveforms are
assumed to preserve the voice identity as well as the artifacts
similar to those caused using speech-generative models [15].
Note that, when replacing the waveform segments with
their corresponding vocoded counterparts, we use an overlap-
add algorithm to ensure a smooth transition between the bona
fide and the vocoded parts [11]. The source data and vocoders
used in this study are explained in the next section.
3. Experiments
To answer the research question raised in § 1, we testified the
models’ performance on synthetic word detection as well as text
transcription, using the training and test data listed in Table 1.
3.1. Data and protocols
Fine-tuning data: we compared fine-tuning datasets using ut-
terances altered by vocoders or speech synthesis systems.
•Ft.Voc: a vocoded fine-tuning data set constructed on the
basis of the MLS dataset [17]. We randomly selected 2,100
utterances per each of five languages: English (en), Italian
(it), German (de), French (fr), and Spanish (es). In each utter-
ance, one to five words were randomly selected and vocoded
using the method in § 2.2 and using each of six vocoders (or
waveform reconstruction methods): HiFi-GAN[18], Wave-
Glow [19], Hn-NSF [20], a hybrid vocoder with Hn-NSF as
the generator and HiFi-GAN’s discriminators, WORLD [21],
and Griffin-Lim (GL) [22]. The first four vocoders are based
on DNNs, and the last two use signal-processing techniques.
If an utterance failed to be vocoded (e.g., due to F0 extraction
error), it was removed. This producedFt.Vocwith around
60k utterances (≈2100×5×6).
•Ft.TTS: a subset of the LlamaPartialSpoof corpus [23]
with the same number of randomly selected utterances as
Ft.Voc. The synthetic words were generated using one of
six text-to-speech (TTS) systems: JETS [24], YourTTS [25],
XTTS [26], SoVITS [27], CosyV oice [28], and ElevenLab4.
•Ft.V+T: a dataset with 50% of the data randomly sampled
fromFt.Vocand the rest sampled fromFt.TTS.
A validation set forFt.Vocwas also created but using another
300 utterances per language. A validation set with the same
size as that ofFt.Vocwas sampled from LlamaPartialSpoof
forFt.TTS. The validation set forFt.V+Twas then merged
from the two validation sets via random sampling.
Test data: theE.Vocmeasures the performance on
vocoded words, while the others measure the performance on
data generated using DNN-based speech synthesis or editing
systems. In terms of the data domain,E.VocandE.TTSare
sourced from audio books, the same domain as the that of the
training sets. In contrast,E.AV1MandE.PEare out-of-domain
data since they are sourced from Youtube or a studio.
•E.Voc: a vocoded data set constructed in the same proce-
dure asFt.Voc. The utterances are disjoint from the train-
ing and validation sets.
•E.TTS: a subset of LlamaPartialSpoof with 3,000 utterances
(disjoint fromFt.TTSorFt.V+T).
•E.AV1M: a subset of the A V-Deepfake 1M validation
set [29]. The synthetic words in the utterances were created
using the TTS systems called VITS [30] and YourTTS [25].
•E.PE: a subset of PartialEdit [9], wherein synthetic words
are created using publicly available attacks. One is V oice-
Craft [8], an LLM-based speech-editing system that manip-
ulates words via modifying the token. The other is also an
LLM-based speech-editing system called SSR-speech [31].
3.2. Models and training configurations
We used the pre-trained Large (v3) Whisper checkpoint [14].
The fine-tuning was done on the entire model with a learning
rate of 1e-5 and batch size of 8 (to fit a single Nvidia H100
GPU card).5 Training was conducted for five epochs, and the
best checkpoint on the validation set was used for evaluation.
4https://elevenlabs.io/
5We tried LoRA [32] but observed no improvement.
1043
Table 1:Statistics of fine-tuning (Ft.) and test (E.) data sets. Generators using full speech-generative systems are in italics.
Name #. of utterances Language(s) Domain Generator of synthetic words
Train
data
Ft.Voc60,596 en, es, fr, it, de Audiobook HiFi-GAN, NSF, NSF+GAN, WaveGlow, WORLD, GL
Ft.TTS60,596 en AudiobookJETS, YourTTS, XTTS, SoVITS, CosyVoice, ElevenLab
Ft.V+T60,596 en, es, fr, it, de Audiobook All above
Test
data
E.Voc3,000 en, es, fr, it, de Audiobook HiFi-GAN, NSF, NSF+GAN, WaveGlow, WORLD, GL
E.TTS3,000 en AudiobookJETS, YourTTS, XTTS, SoVITS, CosyVoice, ElevenLab
E.AV1M3,000 en YoutubeYourTTS, VITS
E.PE3,000 en Studio rec.VoiceCraft, SSR-speech
We also trained a ResNet152 [33] for synthetic word detec-
tion, which was the sub-component of the top system in the lo-
calization track of the 1M-Deepfakes Detection Challenge [33].
The input waveform was transformed into mel spectrogram in
the same setting as Whisper’s front end. The model produces
approximately one detection score per 16 ms. A training label
(REALorFAKE) was prepared per 16 ms given the ground-truth
time alignment. Training was done using binary cross entropy
for a maximum of 30 epochs, and the best checkpoint on the
validation set was used for evaluation.
3.3. Evaluation metrics
The text-transcription performance is measured using the word
error rate (WER) implemented using the JIWER toolkit [34].
The WER is computed after removing{<TOF>,<EOF>}in the
model’s output and ground-truth transcription.
Given the word alignment from the JIWER, the synthetic
word detection is measured using the following metrics:
• false acceptance rate (FAR): among the synthetic words, the
ratio of those being mis-classified as real,
• false rejection rate (FRR): among the real words, the ratio of
those being mis-classified as synthetic.
Note that, even if a word is mis-recognized, it is not counted as
a detection error whenREALorFAKEis correctly labeled. Be-
cause Whisper makes a hard decision when detecting the syn-
thetic words, for a fair comparison, we let ResNet make a hard
decision as well. For every word in a test utterance, the output
probabilities from the ResNet’s softmax layer aligned with the
word were averaged as the probabilities of beingREAL(P real)
andFAKE(P fake). A word is classified as real ifP real > P fake.
3.4. Results on in-domain data
In § 3.4.1, we analyze the setups in which the fine-tuning and
test data are matched in terms of data domain and synthe-
sis methods, i.e., training onFt.Vocand testing onE.Voc
(Ft.Voc→E.Voc), and training onFt.TTSand testing on
E.TTS(Ft.TTS→E.TTS). In § 3.4.2, we discuss the crossed
cases, i.e.,Ft.Voc→E.TTSandFt.TTS→E.Voc. Evalua-
tion across the domains is presented in § 3.5.
3.4.1. Matched data domain and synthetic methods
OnE.Voc, Whisper fine-tuned onFt.Vocobtained a lower
WER (0.87%) than the pre-trained Whisper (23.89%). This is
not surprising because both the fine-tuning and test data are
in the domain of audiobooks. In terms of synthetic word de-
tection, Whisper fine-tuned onFt.Vocobtained an FAR of
7.22% and FRR of 0.52%. The results are on a par with those
of ResNet (FAR 7.15% and FRR 3.81%). We observed similar
results onE.TTS. Whisper fine-tuned onFt.TTSobtained a
Table 2:Results onE.VocandE.TTS. Bold text indicates the
best result in each column and each test set.
Data set WER(%)
Whisper
FAR (%) FRR (%)
Test Fine-tune Whisper ResNet Whisper ResNet
E.Voc
Pre-trained 23.89
Ft.Voc0.87 7.22 7.15 0.52 3.81
Ft.V+T2.18 8.45 9.80 1.01 5.32
Ft.TTS35.11 18.86 76.42 78.59 9.08
E.TTS
Pre-trained 8.13
Ft.Voc12.58 76.16 83.04 9.01 10.14
Ft.V+T3.86 2.08 0.34 3.82 32.90
Ft.TTS2.20 1.38 0.15 1.79 3.13
lower WER (2.20%) than the pre-trained one (8.13%). Mean-
while, the fine-tuned Whisper performed similarly (FAR 1.38%
and FRR 1.79%) to ResNet in synthetic word detection (FAR
0.15% and FRR 3.13%).
Note again that the training and test utterances do not
overlap in terms of speech content. The results suggest that,
in the case where the data domain and synthetic methods
match,the fine-tuned Whisper can well detect synthetic
words while transcribing the input utterance via next-token
prediction. The fine-tuned Whisper performed on par with a
well-known ResNet-based detection model, even though the de-
tection is just an add-on to Whisper’s transcription function.
Example outputs of the fine-tuned Whisper are listed be-
low, where wrong detection is marked in red. Note that the
wordCay-Manis correctly marked asFAKE, even though it is
not correctly transcribed. More examples are in supplementary
materials.
Ground truth:<TOF>I<EOF> <TOF>present<EOF>to you
<TOF>the<EOF>human genome.
Ft.Voc→E.Voc:<TOF>I<EOF> <TOF>present<EOF>to you
<TOF>the<EOF>human genome.
Ground truth: But I could not bear the thought
of<TOF>wearing<EOF> <TOF>decayed<EOF>
<TOF>boots.<EOF>
Ft.TTS→E.TTS: But it could not bear the thought of
<TOF>wearing<EOF> <TOF>Cay-Man<EOF>boots.
3.4.2. Matched data domain but different synthetic methods
When evaluating across the test sets in the same audiobook
domain, the performance of fine-tuned Whisper and ResNet
degraded to different degrees.
OnE.Voc, the fine-tuned Whisper and ResNet trained
from scratch usingFt.TTSobtained higher FARs and FRRs
1044
0.04 0.12 0.20 0.28 0.35 0.43 0.51 0.59 0.67 0.75
Duration (s)
0
20
40
60
80
100Error rates (%)
FAR Ft.Voc
FRR Ft.Voc
FAR Ft.TTS
FRR Ft.TTS
103
104
Count
(a)Error rates of fine-tuned Whisper onE.Voc
0.04 0.11 0.18 0.25 0.32 0.40 0.47 0.54 0.61 0.68
Duration (ms)
0
20
40
60
80
100Error rates (%)
FAR Ft.Voc
FRR Ft.Voc
FAR Ft.TTS
FRR Ft.TTS
103
104
Count
(b)Error rates of fine-tuned Whisper onE.TTS
Figure 2:Analysis of synthetic-word detection error rates based
on word duration. Black and red profiles correspond to fine-
tuned Whisper usingFt.VocandFt.TTS, respectively.
than their counterparts usingFt.Voc. For analysis, we calcu-
lated the FARs and FRRs after grouping the words on the basis
of their durations. Figure 2 (a) plots the results of Whisper fine-
tuned onFt.Voc(black profiles) orFt.TTS(red profiles).
While the FARs of the two fine-tuned Whispers are close, the
FRR when usingFt.TTS(red dashed line) is around or higher
than 80%. In contrast, the FRR when usingFt.Voc(black
dashed line) is close to 0%.
To further investigate the above results, we analyzed the
errors across the languages usingE.Voc. The results presented
in Table 3 indicate that usingFt.TTSled to FAR and FRR
above 40% on the English data. On other languages, it obtained
FARs similar to those when usingFt.Vocbut FRRs close to
90%. This suggests that the increased FRR when training on
Ft.TTSbut testing onE.Vocis due to the unseen languages.
OnE.TTS, the results in Table 2 indicate that Whisper fine-
tuned onFt.Vocobtained higher FAR and FRR than its coun-
terparts usingFt.TTS. Particularly, its FAR was as high as
76.16%. As analysis, we plot the FARs and FRRs against the
word duration in Figure 2 (b) and observe that Whisper fine-
tuned onFt.Vocobtained high FARs (black solid line) regard-
less of the word duration. A high FAR suggests thatWhisper
fine-tuned on the vocoded training data struggles to spot
words created using the TTS systems. Using more diverse
vocoders may improve performance, but exploration is left to
future work.
Note that the FRR of Whisper fine-tuned onFt.Vocin-
creases when the word is longer (black dashed line in Figure 2
(b)). The same trend is observed on Whisper fine-tuned using
Ft.TTS(red dashed line). One hypothesis is that the fine-tuned
Whisper seems to flagREALonly if it does not find any artifact
within a word. The longer a word is, the more likely it contains
patterns similar to artifacts.
3.5. Results on out-of-domain test data
Given the above results, it is not surprising that the performance
of the fine-tuned Whisper and ResNet also degraded on the out-
of-domain test data. As Table 4 shows, on bothE.AV1Mand
Table 3:Decomposed results over languages using pre-trained
Whisper (left) or fine-tuned onFt.Voc(right).
FAR (%) FRR (%)
Ft.Voc Ft.TTS Ft.Voc Ft.TTS
en 8.38 46.28 0.50 40.97
fr 10.41 11.54 0.78 91.19
es 5.59 10.76 0.36 89.36
de 5.47 8.97 0.40 91.80
it 6.30 13.03 0.53 88.12
Table 4:Results on test sets manipulated using DNN-based
speech synthesis and editing systems. Within each column,
value with darker shading indicates worse performance.
Data set WER(%)
Whisper
FAR (%) FRR (%)
Test Fine-tune Whisper ResNet Whisper ResNet
E.AV1M
Pre-trained 14.72
Ft.Voc 23.17 39.98 33.70 7.70 17.69
Ft.V+T 21.23 15.98 27.63 39.42 27.04
Ft.TTS 20.47 16.04 11.14 59.97 36.44
E.PE
Pre-trained 3.64
Ft.Voc 5.01 78.60 88.75 9.61 11.97
Ft.V+T 4.81 28.39 36.56 49.90 40.44
Ft.TTS 5.77 8.74 30.92 87.89 52.49
E.PE, we observe higher WER when Whisper is fine-tuned us-
ing either vocoded or TTS-synthesized data. In terms of syn-
thetic word detection, the detection performance is overall un-
stable. For example, when training usingFt.Vocand testing
onE.PE, both models obtained low FRRs ( 10%) but very high
FARs ( 80%). In short,current out-of-domain synthetic word
detection is not yet sufficiently reliable.
Note that, when usingFt.TTS, comparison between the
results onE.TTSandE.AV1Mshows that both the fine-
tuned Whisper and ResNet performed worse onE.AV1M, even
though the synthesizers (YourTTSandVITS) were covered by
the training data. Hence, to improve the out-of-domain perfor-
mance, understanding the differences across datasets may be
more important than complicating the model architecture.
4. Conclusion
We proposed a method for fine-tuning Whisper to detect syn-
thetic words while preserving its speech-to-text transcription
capability. The proposed method requires only augmenting the
text token sequences with tokens that mark synthetic words,
with no change to the algorithm or model architecture. This in-
tegrates the detection task into the next-token prediction task. In
the experiment in which the training and test data matched, the
fine-tuned Whisper, while executing transcription, detected the
synthetic words with a performance comparable to a dedicated
ResNet-based detection model. However, results on multiple
test sets also indicate that the detection performance degraded
when there was a data-domain mismatch between the training
and test sets. A better understanding of the cross-domain dif-
ferences is needed for future work. Using vocoded training data
did not mitigate the degradation when the synthetic words were
from a different domain or unseen synthesizers. Future work
will investigate using vocoded data from diverse synthesizers
and domains.
1045
5. Acknowledgment
This work is partially supported by JST, PRESTO Grant (JP-
MJPR23P9), Japan. Hoan My Tran is supported by NII Inter-
national Internship Program based on MOU. It is partially done
on TSUBAME4.0, Institute of Science Tokyo.
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI was used to check grammatical errors.