Measuring English and Vietnamese language input and output in an
Australian preschool – A longitudinal study
Ha Chi Tran ID 1,∗∗, Minh Anh Tran ID 1, Mai Linh Tran ID 2, Weicong Li ID 1, Paola Escudero ID 1
1 The MARCS Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Development, Western Sydney University,
Australia
2 Deakin University, Australia
Ch.Tran@westernsydney.edu.au, MinhAnh.Tran@westernsydney.edu.au,
s220417522@deakin.edu.au, Weicong.Li@westernsydney.edu.au,
Paola.Escudero@westernsydney.edu.au
Abstract
Providing heritage language (HL) support to enable bilingual-
ism from an early age, especially within the community and out-
side the home environment, is important. However, in Australia,
there is limited support for maintaining HL in early childhood
education. In this study, we measured English and Vietnamese
as HL input and output in a Vietnamese language exposure pro-
gram in Melbourne, Australia. We compared the duration of
utterances produced in the first eight sessions of two implemen-
tations of the program. An increase in children’s total speech
from the first to the second implementation indicates greater
engagement and participation. The results demonstrate that En-
glish remained the dominant language in both implementations.
Regarding Vietnamese, children’s output increased while the in-
put given by the facilitator reduced. By comparing two imple-
mentations, this study offers a refined quantitative methodology
for measuring language input and output in a language program
designed for preschoolers. The implications of this study sup-
port the implementation of similar programs in Vietnamese and
other HL in Australia and worldwide.
Index Terms: heritage language, preschool-aged children,
bilingual children, children’s speech
1. Introduction
Australia is a culturally rich and diverse country, with many
bilingual or multilingual families and communities. Growing
up in such vibrant environment, children are often exposed to
and may learn a language other than English at home. A lan-
guage that is spoken at home, but not by most of society, is re-
ferred to as a heritage language (HL) [1]. Despite the significant
cognitive, linguistic, sociocultural, and familial benefits associ-
ated with early multilingualism [2-4], there is limited and under-
researched support for maintaining HLs outside the home, in
early childhood education and childcare settings. This lack of
support can result in subtractive bilingualism, where children’s
environments only support the learning of the majority language
at the expense of their HL [5]. Results from a nationwide sur-
vey by [6] highlighted a strong need for HL support in Australia,
particularly among preschool-aged children. To enhance the de-
velopment of HL in bilingual children, it is essential to provide
them with both language input and opportunities for language
output [9].
The quantity of language input and output significantly in-
fluences children’s language development [8, 10-12]. Measur-
**indicates the corresponding author.
ing language input and output in preschool-aged children is es-
sential for gaining insights into their bilingual language devel-
opment. Over the years, researchers have employed a range of
methods to quantify language input and output in children. Both
indirect and direct methods have been used to examine popula-
tions from birth through school age in monolingual and multi-
lingual contexts. According to [13], the parental questionnaire
is the most frequently employed indirect method for examining
language experience in bilingual language acquisition studies.
There are many questionnaires readily available for researchers
to use (see [13], for a review).
A popular direct method is recording children’s language
use at home. Automated tools like the Language Environment
Analysis (LENA) are widely adopted for capturing daylong au-
dio recordings. The LENA system has been utilised in studies
involving both monolingual children (e.g., [14, 15]) and bilin-
gual children (e.g., [16, 17]). The parental questionnaires and
automated recordings are used together in a few studies to quan-
tify bilingual children’s language input (e.g., [18, 19]). For in-
stant, [19] examined the language input of 31 Turkish - Dutch
and 21 Polish - Dutch preschool-aged children, obtained via the
questionnaire for Quantifying Bilingual Experience (Q-BEx)
and day-long audio recordings made with the LENA system.
The authors found that both the Q-BEx and LENA, as well as
the combined method, can be deemed reliable for measuring the
quantity of children’s language input.
Despite technological advances, manual transcription and
annotation remain essential for validation, detailed linguistic
analysis, and in situations where automated tools are less ef-
fective. Many studies involving monolingual English-speaking
children and children who learned English as an additional lan-
guage have explored linguistic input from preschool teachers’
speech by observing and examining recordings of their speech
in different preschool classrooms. The linguistic environment
can be captured by using a microphone during audiotaping [20,
21], head-mounted cameras [22], video cameras with portable
audio recorders [23], or a digital video camera mounted on a
tripod [24]. Speech was transcribed from recordings then anal-
ysed using a computer program.
Regarding bilingual children, a method was proposed by [5]
in a study that examined the quantity of linguistic input and out-
put among children attending a bilingual preschool in Sydney,
Australia. In this preschool, both the HL Spanish and English
were used in natural interactions between native HL Spanish
educators at the preschool and children. A bilingual research
assistant (RA) visited the preschool in the mornings over eight
weeks to conduct video-record interactions between educators
4914
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3213
and children participating in various routine activities. From a
total of 138 video recordings, 61 videos of varying lengths were
chosen for analysis. Each recording was reviewed by a bilingual
RA, who annotated the duration of educator or children’s speech
in Spanish, English, or a mixture of both languages. The au-
thors argued that the targeted use of video recordings and man-
ual coding of utterances can provide greater precision compared
to automated systems.
In a previous study, a similar method was used to investigate
children and facilitator’s speech during the first implementation
of a Vietnamese language exposure program at a preschool in
Melbourne, Australia [25]. The program operated three days
per week across three terms in 2023 (see [26] for the descrip-
tion of the program content first implemented in Spanish, and
[27] for its adaptation to Vietnamese). All sessions featured in-
teractions between a native Vietnamese program facilitator and
preschool children, which were video recorded using Zoom.
The authors selected and analysed 48 recordings, including 36
five-minute segments and 12 ten-minute segments, to repre-
sent various time points within the program. They found that
the Vietnamese language exposure program, which provided
structured educational sessions, was effective in increasing chil-
dren’s speech in comparison to the amount of children speech
reported in [5]. However, English was the dominant language
across sessions for both facilitator and children, who both in-
creased the used of English throughout the sessions.
In the present study, we report on the second year of the
same Vietnamese language exposure program, i.e. implemen-
tation 2 (IMP-2). In this second year, half of the children who
participated in the first implementation (IMP-1) returned, with
the program now conducted twice a week across three school
terms. We used the same method as to examine whether chil-
dren’s participation as well as their relative use of English and
Vietnamese, as measured by the duration of their utterances in
each language, differed from first to second year of the Viet-
namese language program.
We address two research questions below:
1. Is the overall language output of children in IMP-2 of
the Vietnamese language program higher than that reported for
IMP-1?
2. Does the children’s Vietnamese and English input and
output increase from IMP-1 to IMP-2?
Due to the fact that half of the children from IMP-1 came
back in IMP-2, we anticipate that children’s overall output dur-
ing the Vietnamese language program will be higher in IMP-2.
Similarly to IMP-1, more than half of the participating children
in IMP-2 were children who learned Vietnamese as additional
language. Therefore, we predicted that Vietnamese use would
remain low and might not increase from IMP-1 to IMP-2, espe-
cially because many of the new participants were not HL Viet-
namese, with no prior knowledge of the language.
2. Methods
2.1. Corpus and participants
The recordings used in this study were collected during IMP-2
of a Vietnamese exposure program in an early childhood setting
in Melbourne, Australia [27]. This study analysed speech data
from a Vietnamese facilitator and 30 children from 3 to 5 years
old, including 13 Vietnamese HL children and 17 AL children.
Half of the children from IMP-1 returned and were older, while
a new group of 3-year-olds joined. Therefore, the average age
remained consistent across both years, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1:Participants’ demographic information
IMP-1 (2023) IMP-2 (2024)
Female (n) 12 12
Male (n) 27 18
Mean age (range) 4.32 (3.0-5.58) 4.28 (3.07-5.15)
Mean language
exposure, % (range)
English
Vietnamese
83.62 (25-100)
16.34 (0-100)
84.59 (30-100)
19.40 (10-90)
HL children (n) 15 13
AL children (n) 24 17
Children participated in 45-minute sessions, two times per
week for three consecutive terms. Term 1 lasted for 11 weeks,
term 2 lasted for 9 weeks, and term 3 lasted for 10 weeks.
As mentioned in [25], the language sessions were structured
around thematic units that progressively increased in both con-
ceptual and linguistic complexity throughout the delivery term.
Each term focused on a specific theme, includingFruits and
Colours, Farm Animals and Numbers,andSpace and the Uni-
verse.Each term/theme incorporated five important linguistic
outcomes: vocabulary, listening, speaking, literacy, and nu-
meracy. All sessions adhered to a consistent structure that in-
cluded an interactive introduction, hands-on activities, whole-
class practice, and a concluding recap to reinforce learning (see
[25] for details).
Demographic and language use data about children were
collected via a Qualtrics survey sent to parents, along with the
electronic consent form and information sheet. Data collec-
tion for IMP 1 and 2 was approved by the Western Sydney
University Human Ethics Committee (ethics approval number
H11022), with the last author serving as the data custodian.
IMP-1 data analysis was conducted by the other four authors
who were part of the research team from the start of the project.
Data analysis of the first 10 recordings in IMP-2 by the first au-
thor was approved by the Western Sydney University Human
Ethics Committee (ethics approval number: H16787). All data
were fully de-identified, ensuring the privacy and confidential-
ity of the participants.
2.2. Recordings selection
All language sessions were audio-visually recorded using
Zoom. Each recording lasted about 30 minutes. We selected
eight audio recordings, including two ten-minute segments and
six five-minute segments for both IMP-1 and IMP-2, using the
same selection criteria as used in [25]. As mentioned in [25],
five-minute segments were taken from the middle of each audio
recording. The ten-minute segments include an additional five
minutes right before the initial five-minute segments.
2.3. Data processing
The first author, a native speaker of Vietnamese who is also flu-
ent in English, listened to each audio segment and manually
annotated the start and end of both facilitator and preschoolers’
speech in English (E) or Vietnamese (V) using Praat, a freeware
program designed for the analysis and reconstruction of acous-
tic speech signals [28]. The duration of each time interval of
facilitator speaking English or Vietnamese as language input to
preschoolers, and that of preschoolers’ speech as language out-
put was extracted using MATLAB scripts. Descriptive statistics
4915
were then calculated for each recording.
2.4. Statistical analysis
A Bayesian regression analysis was performed to investigate the
relationship between the relative use of Vietnamese and English
by both the facilitator and the children, and how the relative use
of each language changed over time, as previously used in [5,
25].
Bayesian statistics were selected for several reasons. First,
they enable the incorporation of background knowledge with
the use of priors in regression analyses. This feature supports
the development of cumulative meta-analytic knowledge, which
is not possible with the frequentist approach of null hypoth-
esis significance testing [29]. Furthermore, Bayesian statis-
tics provide credibility intervals, which indicate the probabil-
ity that a parameter’s true value lies within a certain interval.
This method offers a more intuitive understanding of uncer-
tainty compared to the fixed-value approach in frequentist mod-
els [30], especially when the sample size is limited.
In the regression model, speech duration measured in sec-
onds was treated as the dependent variable, and implementation
(two level categorical, i.e. IMP-1 vs. IMP-2) and speaker (two
level categorical, i.e. children vs. facilitator) were treated as
independent variables. Data processing and analysis were con-
ducted in RStudio using the brms package [31].
3. Results
We first review the results from the descriptive analysis of the
raw data, followed by the results from the Bayesian regression
model, which calculates the probability of speech output being
in either Vietnamese or English.
3.1. Descriptive results
Table 2 summarises the results of facilitator’s speech and chil-
dren’s speech in Vietnamese and English in the first and second
implementation. Overall, in both implementations the facili-
tator contributed a much larger amount of speech in both lan-
guages than the children. In IMP-2, the amount of children’s
speech accounted for25.3%of the total speech measured in the
eight selected recordings, including two ten-minute segments
and six five-minute segments. This result exceeds the10.9%re-
ported in IMP-1[25] for a comparable sample of eight selected
recordings.
The ratio of facilitator’s speech to children’s speech in IMP-
2 is2.94, whereas this number in IMP-1 was8.17[25]. This
result indicates that in IMP-2, children were more engaged and
spoke more with the facilitator than in IMP-1.
The mean of relative use of English and Vietnamese by chil-
dren and facilitator in both IMP-1 and IMP-2 are also presented
in Table 2. Similar to IMP-1, the facilitator still contributed
most of the speech during eight sessions in IMP-2.
3.2. Bayesian modelling
Based on the patterns found in the descriptive results above,
we formulated the following five hypotheses to test whether the
probability of children’s and facilitator’s language use in En-
glish and Vietnamese varied over time.
From IMP-1 to IMP-2:
H1: Children’s speech increases.
H2: Facilitator’s English speech increases.
H3: Children’s English speech increases.
Table 2:Children and Facilitator speech (in seconds, left) and
mean relative use of English and Vietnamese (%, right) by chil-
dren and facilitator , with SD in parentheses
IMP-1 IMP-2
Children English 155 6.6%
(2.8) 396 16.1%
(5.1)
Vietnamese 98 4.1%
(1) 203 8.1%
(3.7)
Total 253 10.7%
(3.3) 599 24.2%
(7.3)
Facilitator English 162 7.2%
(3.3) 535 22%
(7.0)
Vietnamese 1,906 82.2%
(3.8) 1,229 53.8%
(13.7)
Total 2,068 89.3%
(3.3) 1,764 75.8%
(7.3)
Table 3:Results from the hypothesis tests for facilitator and
children’s speech from IMP-1 to IMP-2
Est. Est.
Error 95% CI Evid.
Ratio Evidence
H1 43.0 26.2 0.35 – 86.3 19.6 Strong
H2 46.4 12.2 26.0 – 66.0 Inf Very strong
H3 30.2 13.9 7.26 – 53.0 69.2 Very strong
H4 84.6 16.6 57.4 – 112.4 Inf Very strong
H5 13.4 19.1 -17.4 – 45.1 3.18 Moderate
H4: Facilitator’s Vietnamese speech decreases.
H5: Children’s Vietnamese speech increases.
Table 3 shows the results of our hypothesis testing, includ-
ing the strength of the evidence for each hypothesis. As can
be seen in the table, there is strong evidence that the probabil-
ity of children’s language use increased from IMP-1 to IMP-
2 (H1). When examining each language individually, there is
very strong evidence that the facilitator’s English input to chil-
dren increased (H2), and that children’s English output also in-
creased (H3). In contrast, there is very strong evidence that the
facilitator reduced her Vietnamese input (H4), while moderate
evidence suggests that children’s Vietnamese output increased
(H5).
4. Discussion
This study examined the use of English and Vietnamese as HL
input and output in the second implementation of a Vietnamese
language exposure program in Melbourne, Australia, and com-
pared the results with those of the first implementation reported
in [25].
We first found that children’s output in IMP-2 accounted for
25.3% of the total speech, which was more than twice that re-
ported in the equivalent-duration recordings in IMP-1, at 10.9%
[25]. This result indicates that children produced substantially
more speech during the second year of the program. Notably,
we also found the input:output ratio changed from 8.17:1 in
IMP-1 to 2.94:1 in IMP-2, demonstrating that children showed
greater engagement and communicated more frequently with
the facilitator during IMP-2 than during the previous one. In
IMP-2, half of the children from IMP-1 returned to the pro-
gram, along with new participants. Returning children were
likely more familiar with both the facilitator and the program’s
content. As a result, these children could assist peers in im-
proving comprehension and oral expression. This increased fa-
4916
miliarity may account for the observed rise in children’s Viet-
namese language output during the first eight recordings, when
the language program had just commenced.
Bayesian analyses demonstrated very strong evidence that
children’s English speech increased from IMP-1 to IMP-2. Al-
though several children from IMP-1 re-entered the program,
which could suggest that increased English output resulted from
developmental changes over two years, the inclusion of new
children aged 3 ensured comparable age distributions across
both years. Therefore, developmental changes are unlikely to
account for the observed increase.
English continued to be the dominant language in children’s
output. This result may be attributed to the fact that more than
half of the participants were AL children. Many of these partic-
ipants had never used Vietnamese in their daily life and lacked
confidence in speaking the language.
In both implementations, the probability of Vietnamese in-
put decreased, while the use of English input increased over
time. Similar to IMP-1 [25], more than half of the children ac-
quiring Vietnamese as an additional language participated in the
IMP-2, with 25 out of 39 and 17 out of 30 children reported, re-
spectively. Each year, the facilitator was instructed to maximise
the use of Vietnamese during sessions. However, as the pro-
gram progressed, the facilitator demonstrated greater comfort
and engagement with the children, leading to more frequent use
of English, the language shared by all participants. This helped
create a more inclusive and effective learning environment. It
aligned with research on translanguaging, which suggests that
educators use familiar languages to keep children interested in
learning, and that children learn new communication skills as
they grow in their ability to understand and create meaning [32].
A main limitation of this study is the analysis of children’s
speech as a single cohort rather than assessing groups of HL and
AL children independently. Combining groups could mask the
unique language patterns of each group over time. Future re-
search should examine language use longitudinally within each
group to provide more detailed insights into the distinct lan-
guage use patterns of HL and AL children.
5. Conclusion
The present study investigated the longitudinal trajectories of
children’s speech in English and Vietnamese from the first to
the second implementation of a Vietnamese language exposure
program for preschoolers in Melbourne, Australia [27]. Em-
ploying the same methodology as [25], the findings indicate that
the language structure exposure program effectively increased
children’s production over two consecutive years. Neverthe-
less, English remains the dominant language in this context.
This study underscores the importance of supporting heritage
language development in early childhood, particularly in coun-
tries where English is the primary language. The implications
of this research support the implementation of similar language
exposure programs in Vietnamese and other heritage languages
in Australia and globally.
6. Acknowledgements
This research was supported by an Australian Research Coun-
cil (ARC) Future Fellowship grant (FT160100514) and ARC
Linkage grant (LP210300631) both awarded to the fifth author.
The work of the first, second, third and fourth authors was sup-
ported by the ARC Linkage grant (LP210300631). The first au-
thor’s works was also supported by the Commonwealth through
an Australian Government Research Training Program Scholar-
ship [DOI: https://doi.org/10.82133/C42F-K220].
We thank the multilingual advocacy organization Viˆe.tSpeak
(www.vietbilingual.org) for providing community partnership
funding to the ARC Linkage grant and for facilitating the col-
laboration with the Melbourne preschool were this study took
place. We also thank the preschool director, educators and par-
ents for their support to the Vietnamese program.
7. Generative AI Disclosure
The first authors used Grammarly to correct grammatical and
typographic errors and improve clarity of the manuscript. The
other authors revised and edited the manuscript without the use
of AI.