AudioNoisePrints: Model-free audio watermarking using spatial correlation in
flow matching TTS
Timothy Tin-Long Tse ID 1,2, Jian Zhu ID 2, Aidan Pine ID 1, Mengzhe Geng ID 1
1 National Research Council Canada, Canada
2 University of British Columbia, Canada
timothytse1997@gmail.com, jian.zhu@ubc.ca, aidan.pine@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca,
mengzhe.geng@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
Abstract
We presentAudioNoisePrints, atraining-freewatermarking
pipeline for flow matching and diffusion TTS models, which
requires minimal extra computation during inference and does
not require retraining the TTS model or reducing the generation
quality. We exploited the fact that there are strong correlations
between the initial Gaussian noises and the generated outputs
in diffusion and flow matching models, such that a simple co-
sine correlation between the initial noise and the generated out-
put can be used to perform watermaking. Moreover, we train a
lightweight detector on top for more aggressive augmentations.
Our method outperformsAudioSeal, a strong baseline for audio
watermarking under strong augmentations. We experimented
onF5TTSand other TTS and vocoder models, and concluded
that they all exhibit similarspatial correlationproperties, sug-
gesting our watermarking scheme can be used for more flow-
matching TTS models and even vocoders in the future.
Index Terms: Audio Watermarking, Speech Synthesis
1. Introduction
Flow matching models [1] and diffusion models [2] have anable
impressive progress in speech synthesis, from multi-speaker
Text-to-Speech models like MatchaTTS [3], E2TTS [4], and
F5-TTS [5], to vocoders like DiffWave [6] and WaveFM [7].
While they are praised for their capability in high-fidelity
speech synthesis, very little is known of their properties beyond
generation quality.
In recent years, researchers have tried to analyze the rela-
tionship between the intermediate latent representations of dif-
fusion and flow matching (FM) models and the semantics of the
generated data. Recent results showed the correlation might be
straightforward: the latent encodings (originating noise) some-
what resemble the generated image patterns [8, 9]. More specif-
ically, the generated image has a much stronger correlation
with the originating noise than any other randomly generated
noise (see §2 for elaboration). This property allows a simple
method of watermarking (namedNoisePrints[9]): determinis-
tically creating a set of initial noise for generation and using the
correlation between the known noise and generated output as
the metric to determine if the image originated from the noise.
This is especially important for watermarking, as it not only
prevents the watermarking process from reducing the quality of
the generated image [10], but it also does not require retraining
the flow-matching model or an external detector. In this way,
the approach is ‘model-free’.
In the original work forNoisePrints, only one specific type
of model was explored: a latent diffusion model which gener-
ates images via a V AE. To our knowledge, we are the first to
investigate this approach on diffusion or flow matching (FM)
based speech-synthesis models. In this work, our main contri-
butions can be summarized as follows:
• Our experiments with F5-TTS and MatchaTTS shows our
new watermarking scheme achieved better robustness under
strong augmentation when comparing with state-of-the-art
post-hoc deep watermarking models; without the need of re-
training the TTS model or introducing extra compute during
inference time. Our method also circumvents the trade-off
between “qualityvsrobustness”
• We further extend the original approach by introducing an ex-
ternal detector, which again achieves better result against the
strong baseline model while maintaining the advantages of
NoisePrints’s methodology (no overhead during generation
and no impact on generation quality).
• We show that other flow matching (FM) and diffusion TTS
and vocoder models also exhibit strong correlations between
originating noises and generated data as described by [8, 9],
proving more TTS and vocoder models can be benefited with
our simple watermarking approach.
2. Background
2.1. Diffusion and Flow-matching
Diffusion models and flow matching (FM) models are a fam-
ily of iterative generative models with a similar process of re-
versing Gaussian noise into the target data distribution [11, 12].
Consider a data pointx 0 (could either be an image, a Mel-
spectrogram, or audio frame) and a Gaussian noisex L with in-
termediate stepsi∈[0,L]. For the diffusion modelϵ ϕ(xi,i),
we have the following iterative equation (see Lemma 2.2.2 and
Equation 2.2.9 in [12]):
xi−1 = 1
αi

xi− 1−α 2
ip
1−¯α2
i
ϵϕ(xi,i)

αi andβ i are predetermined constants withα i
p
1−β 2
i
andβ i∈(0,1), and¯α i
Qi
j=0αi. On the other hand, for flow
matching modelsvϕ(xi,i), we have
xi−1 =x i +vϕ(xi,i)dti
Wheredt i are, again, predetermined constants. In both
cases, we can see that for each step ofi, the model output of
diffusion (ϵϕ(xi,i)) and flow-matching (v ϕ(xi,i)) models are
trained to guide the Gaussian noise fromx L all the way to the
data distribution ofx 0, acting similar to a vector field in the
target data space (note that we only consider the case for us-
ing the Euler ODE solver, which is the only solver used in all
experiments in this paper).
6881
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2165
Figure 1:General overview of our approach (AudioNoisePrints) comparing to the commonly used post-hoc watermarking schemes. As
shown above, the post-hoc watermarking model required altering the audio after it is generated, which creates computation overhead
and alters the quality of the audio. Our method simply changes the initial noise ˆxinit during generation (without altering the quality
of the generated audio), and uses either the model-free option (calculating the cosine similarity of the audio-Mel-spectrogram and the
initial noise) or the more robust detector option to determine if the audio is in fact watermarked.
In recent developments, there have been multiple findings
on the relationship betweenx L and the generatedx 0 via diffu-
sion model, namely, the spatial relations between the two [8, 9].
They found that the cosine similarity between the generated
x0 and originating noisex L is significantly higher than that of
other randomly sampled noisex′
0∼N(0,I). This resulted in
a higher Pearson correlation between each pixel inx 0 andx L.
It seems the patterns in the generated image (or latent) are also
present in the original noise.
2.2. Audio Watermarking
Deep audio watermarking algorithms [13, 14, 15, 16, 17]
strive to inject robustly detectable yet imperceptible information
within audio. Most current approaches fall under the following
two categories.
2.2.1. Post-hoc watermarking
Applied on the already generated audio (hence the name “post-
hoc”), these models are plug-and-play in the sense that you
can simply download an open-source watermarking model and
implement it in your pipeline. However, recent research has
shown that using open-source watermarking schemes is prone
tooverwriting attacks[18], where the attacker simply has to
detect which watermarking model is used in the audio and pro-
ceed to overwrite it with their own watermark (using the same
open-source model). Post-hoc watermarking also requires ex-
tra computational resources and latency in the audio generation
pipeline. Moreover, post-hoc watermarking requires the audio
to be altered; the more audibly altered the audio is, the more
robust the watermark becomes to malicious attacks (harder to
erase), but this also means there exists a fundamental trade-off
between audio quality and robustness.
2.2.2. In-model watermarking
On the other hand, in-model watermarking [19, 15] tries to in-
troduce the watermark during the generation process, which
usually requires retraining the generative model (for example,
[19] retrain the entire TTS model in order to make it detectable).
While these methods avoid some of the shortcomings of post-
hoc watermarking, such as extra computation and vulnerability
to overwriting attacks, they require many more computational
resources to train, and the generation quality might also be af-
fected after the in-model watermarking training is conducted, as
one cannot simply “add” in-model watermarking on top of their
existing audio generation pipeline.
Notably,NoisePrints[9] is an in-model watermarking al-
gorithm for latent image generation models. TheNoisePrints
watermarking method uses the property of spatial similarity be-
tween noise and output mentioned in section 2.1 by creating a
set of predetermined initial noisexspecial
0 (from a known hash).
By directly comparing that initial noise and the image’s latent
x′
L (encoded by the same V AE encoder) via cosine similarity
dsim =cosSim(x special
0 ,x′
L), they can determine if that im-
age was in fact generated from that particular noise via compar-
ing the similarity score with an empirical thresholdτ. In short,
ifdsim >τ, the image will be determined as having been gen-
erated from that particular noise.
In this work, we are able to leverage such properties of dif-
fusion and flow matching models to create an in-model pipeline
whichdoes not require retraining the audio generation model,
while also preserving most (if not all) of the generation quality.
3. Method
In this section we will discuss the ways in which we adapt the
NoisePrintsmethod from the image domain to audio.
3.1. Adoption of NoisePrints in audio domain
We define the distance between the original noise (x 0) and
the generated audio and/or Mel-spectrogramsx L asd org =
fdist(x0,xL), withf dist being distance functions such as
cosine-similarity. Unlike the original approach, the distance
dorg is not calculated in the latent space but rather in the audio
or Mel-spectrogram domain. Instead of using a fixed threshold
τlike in [9], we calculate the empirical p-value by compar-
ing the distance between Mel-spectrogram and original noise
dorg =f dist(x0,xL)and the distances between the same au-
dio but withN(500 in all of our experiments) randomly gener-
ated noise, i.ed rand =f dist(xrand,xL). A thresholdτ p is set
for the minimum p-value required for a audio to be considered
“watermarked”.
6882
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Signal-to-Noise Ratio in db
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0Accuracy
White Noise
Cosine similarity
Audioseal
Detector
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Signal-to-Noise Ratio in db
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00Accuracy
Pink Noise
500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
high pass cut off
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0Accuracy
high pass filter
500 600 700 800 900 1000
low pass cut off
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9Accuracy
low pass filter
50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000
bit-rate
0.97
0.98
0.99
1.00Accuracy
MP3 compression
1 2 3
remaining audio length (seconds)
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00Accuracy
Audio Cropping
0.9 0.95 1.0 1.05 1.1
Speed scaling factor
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0Accuracy
Speed
Figure 2:Accuracy comparing the AudioSeal and our approaches. While AudioSeal has a higher top-end score (1.0 accuracy), under
strong augmentation, our method (using either the model-free Cosine similarity approach or the Detector approach) significantly
outperforms the post-hoc watermark baseline. Especially in the speed augmentation, where AudioSeal fails even witha 1 percent
change in stretching.
3.2. TheDetectorapproach
AdaptingNoisePrintsfrom the image to audio domain also
poses new challenges. In TTS, an attack in the frequency do-
main could significantly reduce our detection accuracy. This
raises the question: How robust is this spatial correlation in
the audio Mel-spectrogram space? Moreover, as audio does not
have a fixed size like a predetermined latent, simple attacks such
as cropping and speed augmentation can cause the watermark-
ing recovery to become significantly more complex, requiring
algorithms that use sliding windows and dynamic time warp-
ing.
While we can still use cosine similarity, we devise a new
watermarking pipeline to reduce these complexities during de-
tection. We name it theDetectorapproach. Given a special
noise (ˆxinit in Figure 1), we train an external convolutional neu-
ral net with the objective of binary classification (if that audio
is generated from the noiseˆxinit or not, via a specific TTS dif-
fusion/FM model). In order to increase robustness to combat
the issue mentioned above, we apply data augmentation meth-
ods (including compression codecs like MP3 and AAC). We
synthesize data from the TTS models with two categories: 1)
generated fromˆxinit, and 2) noisex 0 being randomly sampled.
To make the noise prediction even more reliable to combat ag-
gressive attacks such as cropping, we sample the noiseˆx init
periodically with a fixed length of 100 frames in Mel-space, i.e.
for every audio with lengthL, we repeatˆx init until the final
length exceedsL.
We want to emphasize that while theDetectorapproach re-
quires additional training, the biggest benefit of a model-free
approach still persists, namely we do not need to retrain the
TTS model (which could lead to quality degradation). The de-
tector approach is only used here to increase inference speed
and reduce complexity.
3.3. Experiments
3.3.1. F5-TTS and MatchaTTS
For Text-to-Speech models, we use the official implementa-
tion of F5-TTS1 and MatchaTTS 2, a state-of-the-art Diffusion
1https://github.com/SWivid/F5-TTS
2https://github.com/shivammehta25/Matcha-TTS
τp 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00
CoSim 0.905 0.9300.9490.975 0.988
L10.392 0.422 0.450 0.476 0.497
L20.405 0.424 0.448 0.474 0.497
Dot0.885 0.9220.9550.972 0.986
Table 1:Performance comparison across similarity thresholds
and distance functions (F5-TTS).
F5-TTS
Augmentation CosSim Detecor AudioSeal
AAC compression 0.987 0.9947 1.0
Echo 0.504 0.499 1.0
Table 2:All three methodologies have near 1.0 accuracy AAC
(mp4) compression. Yet the current methodology did not per-
form as well with the “echo” augmentation.
Transformer (DiT) based FM model [20], with a similar pretrain
task (text-guided speech-infilling) as the E2 TTS model [4],
allowing it to leverage reference audio for non-autoaggressive
generation. On the other hand Matcha-TTS uses its own resid-
ual U-Net architecture, the training objective is more tradi-
tional, and it does not make use of reference audio, instead
using speaker IDs for its multi-speaker TTS objective. For F5-
TTS, we used theirF5-TTS v1 Basecheckpoint, with the V ocos
vocoder [21]; and for Matcha-TTS, we used the VCTK check-
points provided in their repository’s ReadMe.
3.3.2. Dataset
For the audio dataset, we choose the commonly used TTS
datasets LibriTTS [22] and LJSpeech [23]. LJSpeech is used
for conducting experiments for the DiffWave vocoder. In order
to create the synthetic dataset to train our external detector, we
used an additional emotion detection text dataset3.
3https://huggingface.co/datasets/jakeazcona/short-text-labeled-
emotion-classification
6883
0.005
 0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025
Cosine Similarity
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5Frequency
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Cosine Similarity
0
2
4
6
8
10
12Frequency
0.02
 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06
Cosine Similarity
0
2
4
6
8
10
12Frequency
Figure 3:(Top) Distributions of random noise similarity versus originated noise similarity (red line) for the DiffWave vocoder [Left] and
MatchTTS [Middle] and F5TTS models [Right]. The generated audio is significantly more similar to the original noise than random
noises.
3.3.3. Trained and Baseline Detector
Our Audio NoisePrints detector is a 4-layerConv2DResNet
trained with a binary classification objective to detect whether
a Mel-spectrogram was generated from our designated noise or
not. During training we feed the model both Mel-spectrograms
generated from randomly initialized noise and specified noise,
and conduct binary classification using the BCE loss function.
We compare our model against theAudioSeal[13] base-
line. It is a classic yet powerful post-hoc watermarking model,
trained with 4.5K hours of data from the V oxPopuli dataset [24].
It was used as a strong baseline in multiple post-hoc watermark-
ing publications [16, 17, 25, 26]. We used their 16k pretrained
checkpoint from the official repository 4.
4. Results and Discussion
4.1. Comparisons with AudioSeal
In Figure 2,AudioNoisePrintsis shown to be just as (if not
more) robust against a trained baseline (AudioSeal) across F5-
TTS and MatchaTTS, models with different architecture and
training objective. While the top line accuracy does not reach
100% (unlike Audioseal, but still reaching around 97-98%), it
performs significantly better under strong augmentations (ex-
cept MP3, which does not seem to affect detection perfor-
mance at all). On the other hand,AudioNoisePrintssignifi-
cantly outperforms AudioSeal in cropping and speed augmenta-
tion, where AudioSeal completely failed with just a one percent
change of audio speed. However, our method did not perform
as well in the “Echo” augmentation (see table 2); this is not
surprising, as AudioSeal is pretrained with this augmentation,
while our method was not. Our detector produced strong results
against conventional audio compression attacks (>97%preci-
sion and accuracy). Without any additional processing during
generation or any compromise on generated quality, our model
performs comparably to the commonly usedAudioSealpost-
hoc watermarking model.
The significance of theAudioNoisePrintsapproach is its
simplicity. While it might not be fair to compare a post-hoc
watermarking scheme with an in-model (or in-generation) one,
our new methodology has no computation overhead on the gen-
eration process or the need to retrain the TTS models (basically
plug-and-play). This approach is also more robust than the post-
hoc AudioSeal model in most augmentations, which not only
specifically trained for the augmentations we tested, it also pre-
trained on a significantly larger dataset (4.5k hours of training
data compared with us using just LibriTTS). This shows that if
the watermark’s objective is to protect (or detect) a Diffusion /
FM Text-to-speech model, our method is much more computa-
tionally and data efficient.
4https://github.com/facebookresearch/audioseal/
4.2. The choice of spatial distance function
We also experimented with three other distance functions (L1,
L2 and dot product). In Table 1,onlycosine similarity and dot-
product are able to achieve any acceptable performance, though
cosine similarity perform slightly better, withcutoff= 1.0hav-
ing the highest accuracy. Accordingly, all the following experi-
ments will useCosSimas their distance function.
4.3. Spatial correlations in other TTS models
As additional validation, we also analyze another diffusion
vocoder. we evaluatedDiffWave[6], a diffusion vocoder.
DiffWave uses a bidirectional dilated convolution architecture
with diffusion modeling, a different architecture than Matcha-
TTS or F5-TTS. We used the official implementation for both
MatchaTTS5 and DiffWave6 in all of our experiments. For
Matcha-TTS, we used the VCTK checkpoints; and for Dif-
fWave we used the LJSpeech checkpoint.
In Figure 3, we can see the distance distribution ofd rand
(in blue) versus the original distanced org (in red) in a sin-
gle audio sample (and with different models, namely, F5-TTS,
Matcha-TTS, and the DiffWave vocoder). We can immediately
see the large divide betweendrand anddorg. We further gener-
ate 500 audio data for MatchaTTS and DiffWave, and in ev-
ery single audio, the p-value of the red line is 0.0, meaning
dorg >>d rand is a general phenomenon for both models. The
finding above shows the spatial-correlation is not unique to the
TTS model we tested, suggesting similar watermarking and de-
tection methodology could be adapted to other FM TTS models
and vocoders.
5. Conclusions
We presentAudioNoisePrints, a model-free watermarking
scheme for fast audio watermarking. Comparing with the com-
monly usedpost-hocwatermarking scheme such asAudioSeal,
our methodology is model-free, with zero computational over-
head during generation, and without compromising the genera-
tion quality with the trade-off of robustness. Our experiments
also show thatAudioNoisePrintsis more robust under strong
augmentations compared to the baselineAudioSeal, which is
trained with thousands of hours of audio data. We show that
the spatial correlation property that enabled our watermark-
ing methodology also exists in other FM and diffusion models.
These findings suggest potential for broader adaptations and ap-
plications in different audio models.
5https://github.com/shivammehta25/Matcha-TTS
6https://github.com/lmnt-com/diffwave/
6884
6. Use of Generative AI Disclosure
No generative AI tools were used in the process of generating
experiment results or writing this manuscript.
7. Acknowledgments
This work was done during first author’s internship at the Dig-
ital Technologies Research Centre, National Research Council
Canada. A special thanks to Robin Shing-Hei Yuen for provid-
ing computation resources when needed.