Time-normalized spectrograms reveal segmental differences in English
heterographic homophones
Yu-Hsiang Tseng1, R. Harald Baayen 1
1 Department of Linguistics, University of T¨ubingen
yu-hsiang.tseng@uni-tuebingen.de,harald.baayen @uni-tuebingen.de
Abstract
Homophones are words that are commonly assumed to sound
the same but have different meanings. They are either homo-
graphic, sharing the same spelling, or heterographic, differ-
ing in spelling. This study focuses on heterographic homo-
phones. Past studies have shown that the spoken word dura-
tion of such homophones is systematically related to their fre-
quency of use. Building on this finding, we investigate whether
and how the segmental realizations of homophones differ, using
time-normalized spectrograms and derived phone logits. We an-
alyzed 14,000 homophone tokens and found that words within
homophone pairs differ in their segmental realizations. Further
analysis indicates that the exact phonetic realization of a token
is shaped by its meaning in the utterance context. These find-
ings are more consistent with lexicon models that assume token-
level alignment between form and meaning than with frame-
works that posit segments as abstract formal symbols.
Index Terms: heterographic homophone, form-meaning map-
ping, discriminative lexicon model, time-normalized spectro-
gram, phone logit
1. Introduction
Homophones are words that are said to sound the same but have
different meanings. Examples from English are heterographic
homophones such aswaitandweight, and homographic homo-
phones such asbankandbank. However, do homophones sound
the same? Empirical evidence suggests they may not be phonet-
ically identical after all [1, 2].
Homophones have been studied extensively because they
allow the analyst to examine meaning while controlling for
form. In psychology, classical models of the mental lexicon
typically posit multiple layers of representation, in which mor-
phological or phonological nodes in these layers pass activation
to one another [3, 4, 5]. As homophones have different mean-
ings but the same pronunciation, they are assumed to share the
same phonological representations [6, 7]. However, not all em-
pirical findings align with the hypothesis. Some studies used
different languages, different kinds of homophones, and differ-
ent tasks, yet failed to find consistent evidence for shared form
representations of homophones [8, 9, 10, 11].
Linguistic studies have also reported systematic differences
in the phonetic realization of homophones, findings that are not
entirely consistent with the hypothesis that homophones share a
form representation. Gahl [1] observed for heterographic homo-
phones in English that more frequent homophones (e.g.,time)
in a pair tend to have shorter spoken word duration in spon-
taneous speech compared to their lower-frequency homophone
twins (e.g.,thyme), after controlling for variables such as speech
rate, predictability, syntactic category, and orthographic regu-
larity. Other studies reported that homophonic words have dif-
ferent phonetic realizations due to differences in frequency of
use, word category, morphological structure, and word mean-
ing [2, 12, 13, 14]. These findings indicate that meaning and
form are tightly linked, challenging models assuming abstract
phonological units shield articulation from semantics.
This paper investigates whether differences in phonetic re-
alizations can directly emerge from a word token’s spectrogram
and whether these differences are modulated by the context-
specific meaning representation of the word token. We study
the realizational difference at the segment level usingtime-
normalized spectrogramsandphone logits, and model the data
using Generalized Additive Model (GAM). In the remainder of
this paper, we first introduce our theoretical framework (section
2). We then discuss the modeling of realization difference and
their relations with token-level semantics in Section 3. A brief
discussion (section 4) concludes our study.
2. Theoretical background
The present research is grounded in the Discriminative Lexicon
Model (DLM) [15, 16], a computational model of the mental
lexicon that implements mappings between forms and mean-
ings to model comprehension and production. The model does
not work with underlying forms — there are no phone or word
nodes — and it does not explicitly store words’ forms or mean-
ings. Taking the comprehension model as an example, a word’s
form is no more than an ephemeral input to the network, and
the model calculates an also ephemeral corresponding meaning
as output.
The form-meaning mappings of the DLM are mostly imple-
mented as simple linear transformations (and potentially non-
linear ones [17, 16, 18]). Using simple linear mappings has
the advantage that no intermediate layers of hidden nodes are
involved to filter the information flowing between form and
meaning. The resulting representations are more linguistically
interpretable, and allow one to investigate to what extent se-
mantic detail and phonetic realization co-vary systematically
[14, 17, 19, 20]. Importantly, the DLM predicts that the de-
tails of words’ meanings unavoidably give rise to differences
in phonetic realization, not only for spoken word duration and
the realization of f0 contours, but also for the phonetic detail of
segmental realization.
The form and meaning representations used in DLM are
numerical vectors. In what follows, we introduce the form and
meaning vectors that are central to the present study.
2.1. Representing Meaning
In DLM, meaning is represented as vectors in the semantic
space. Thesesemantic vectorsare widely used in computational
538
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-793
linguistics, often under the names of word vectors, or as word
embeddings [21, 22, 23], which have their roots in distributional
semantics [24, 25]. Psycholinguistic studies also have a long
tradition of representing meanings as high-dimensional vectors.
[26, 27, 28, 29]. These embeddings are type-based; that is, one
word — in the sense of a letter string — is associated with one
vector, regardless of its occurring context. For example,bankin
“financial bank” and “river bank” is always represented by the
very same semantic vector.
To avoid the limitations of type-specific embeddings, we
use contextualized embeddings (CEs) in the present study.
These token-based embeddings represent the meaning of a word
differently depending on the context in which it occurs. For
the present study, we extracted contextualized embeddings at
the word token level from a pretrained language model (GPT-
2).1 For each token, the input text consisted of a five-word
window immediately preceding (and including) the target word.
The resulting meaning of a word token is represented as a 768-
dimensional vector.
2.2. Representing Speech
Instead of extracting partial information from the speech signal,
such as spoken word duration, spectral-temporal measurements,
or time series of F0 measurements [1, 30, 31], we focus on the
spectrogram itself in the present study.
We start with a word token’s Mel spectrogram, which is in-
formed by the human cochlear frequency-place map [32, 33].
Current deep learning-based models also start with Mel spec-
trograms but further transform the input features with stacks
of non-linear functions [34, 35]. These features integrate in-
formation across time spans and thus mix information from
linguistic units of very different grain sizes. Such non-linear
feature transformation can be advantageous for achieving high
task performance, but makes interpretation harder when study-
ing form–meaning relations at the word-token level.
We therefore opted for constructing speech-derived form
vectors directly from Mel spectrograms. One problem is that
speech tokens in spontaneous speech vary in duration, leading
to spectrograms of very different sizes that can mask similarities
between them. To ensure all tokens have equal-sized spectro-
grams, one can adjust the hop size so that each spectrogram has
a fixed number of timesteps. These are calledtime-normalized
spectrograms.
More specifically, for a given audio token, we (1) find an
optimal step size producing 50 time steps with the following
equation,
step size=
 N−w
T−1

The operator⌊x⌋indicates the floor function, finding the largest
integer smaller thanx.Nis the number of samples in the speech
signal,Trefers to the target number of frames, which is set to
50, andwis the window size set to 10ms (i.e., 160 samples un-
der a sampling rate of 16,000 Hz). See Figure 1 for an example.
Next, we transform the speech signal into a spectrogram
using the found step size and a Hann window, and convert the
spectral information at each time step into 21 mel-frequency
banks. As a preprocessing step, we have also applied pre-
emphasis (with a coefficient of 0.97). These signal processing
steps are carried out in Python with librosa [36].
1This model has 137M parameters, and is available athttps://
huggingface.co/openai-community/gpt2.
Figure 1:Time-normalized spectrogram of a 470ms “wait” to-
ken. The horizontal dashed lines indicate the frequency steps
for the 21 Mel-frequency banks. The vertical dashed lines rep-
resent the 50 timesteps that are obtained with a hop length of
9.4ms.
3. Modeling Segmental Realizations
3.1. Data
The spoken homophone tokens are selected from the Redhen
2016 Dataset, which includes videos of United States television
news broadcasts and their corresponding subtitles [37]. We first
used a forced aligner [38] to obtain the word-level timestamps.
Next, we identified the homophone pairs where the two word
types met the following criteria: (1) each word type occurs at
least 200 times; word types with more than 200 tokens were
downsampled to 200 tokens, and (2) each token appears in a
unique context, defined by up to 10 preceding words. These
selection criteria led to a dataset comprising 35 heterographic
homophone pairs, with 70 orthographic word types and 14,000
tokens. The mean spoken word duration was 331ms (SD=
117ms), and the mean hop size used for time normalization
was 6.5ms (SD= 2.4ms).
We computed the meaning and form representations for
each word token. The meaning representation is the contextu-
alized embedding obtained using the methods described in Sec-
tion 2.1. The form representation is a time-normalized spec-
trogram, flattened into a 1,050-dimensional vector, and com-
pressed to 50 dimensions using PCA, retaining 90% of the
variance. As a sanity check, we use linear discriminant anal-
ysis (LDA) to perform 10-fold cross-validation to assess how
well these vectors can recover homophone pairs (35 classes).
Mean accuracy was 79.30% (SE= 0.42%). A permuta-
tion baseline, where we perform 10-fold cross-validation on a
randomly permuted dataset, is 2.82% (SE= 0.10%). Fur-
thermore, these form vectors can already predict orthographic
words (70 classes). Mean accuracy for 10-fold cross-validation
was 51.13% (SE= 0.46%). The corresponding permutation
baseline was 1.43% (SE= 0.11%). These findings are consis-
tent with previous studies documenting that heterographic ho-
mophones have, on average, distinct phonetic realizations, e.g.,
spoken word durations [14, 39].
The time-normalized spectrogram shows systematic differ-
ences between words in a homophone pair, and we can extend
it to reveal contrast at a finer, segmental level. We zoom in
on each spectrogram and examine how individual segments are
realized differently over time. To do so, on each homophone
pair, we train a simple, linear acoustic model, and compute
segment-levelscoresacross the normalized time axis, yielding
a by-segment time trajectory. These trajectories can then be
statistically modeled to characterize where, in a word, and in
which segments, the homophone contrast emerges.
539
(a)weight and wait.
 (b)mail and male.
 (c)banned/band
Figure 2:Smooths for the logits of segments of selected homophone pairs. Smooths are color-coded by phones within the homophone
pair . Line styles distinguish between homophones within homophone pairs. The insets in the top right of the panels present the AIC
difference of models with and without the word identity (∆AIC); higher values indicate stronger word effects. Shaded areas represent
±1 SE credible intervals. Three example word pairs, out of 35, are shown: (a) weight/wait, (b) male/mail, (c) banned/band. F or clarity,
both the y-axis scales of the smooths and the scales of the inset∆AIC plots differ across panels.
3.2. Phone logits
The segment-level realization is described by thephone logits
derived from a simple acoustic model based on a multi-class
LDA that recognizes only the phones in homophonic words.
The inputs to the models are a subset of the time-normalized
spectrogram, consisting of three frames (timesteps) of Mel fea-
tures, and the prediction target is the phone label obtained from
a forced aligner [38]. For a time-normalized spectrogram of 50
timesteps, there are 48 input-target pairs. For example, the clas-
sifier for thewait/weightpair had to assign each of the 48 input
vectors to one of three phones:w,eI,t. For all 35 homophone
pairs, the classifiers achieved high classification accuracy: the
mean accuracy was 81.53%, with a standard error of 0.01%.
These accuracies are substantially higher than the accuracy of a
random permutation baseline (39.01%,SE= 0.02%).
Phone logits are the scores of the linear component of the
classifier. In the case of LDA, the scores are the outputs be-
fore normalizing into probabilities. The higher the phone logits,
the more clearly the phone is identified by the classifier; hence,
from the classifier’s perspective, it is a more typical realization
of that phone. They are namedlogits, because they are math-
ematically identical to the logits in a logistic regression, where
the logits are considered as log odds.
One intuitive way to understand phone logits is through a
geometrical perspective. A two-class LDA problem can be con-
sidered as finding a good separation between two classes of
points living in a three-dimensional space. The (phone) logit
scores can be viewed as the distance from a point to its projec-
tion on the decision boundary learned by the classifier 2. The
larger the logit relative to zero, the farther the point is from the
decision boundary, and the more certain the classification is.
To compare the phone logits between words in a homo-
phone pair, we fitted separate GAMs to the phone-logit trajecto-
ries for each segment, with normalized time and word duration
as covariates. We included an interaction between normalized
time and word duration to allow for the possibility that the ef-
fect of duration varies over time. The baseline model included a
general smooth of time; the target model included two smooths
for time, one for each homophone in a pair. In addition, the
model included random effect factors for audio source, the pre-
ceding word, and the following word, as well as indicator vari-
2The logit is proportional to the signed distance, with the scaling
constant given by the length of the normal vector.
ables for the presence of a preceding and a following pause.
Across all segment models, target models consistently bet-
ter fit the phone logit trajectories than the baseline models, as
indicated by AIC. The mean AIC difference (the baseline model
AIC minus the target model AIC, the higher the better) is 54.28
(SE=6.18). The homophone pair with the largest AIC differ-
ence ismail/male(mean∆AIC= 187.43), and the smallest
AIC difference isbanned/band(mean∆AIC= -1.57). All ho-
mophone pairs have at least one segment having a positive AIC
difference.
We further examine the phone trajectories and the confi-
dence intervals for each trajectory estimated by the GAM. Fig-
ure 2 visualizes the predicted smooth phone logits for the seg-
ments and the corresponding AIC differences for the selected
homophone pairs. Figure 2a shows the AIC differences and
curves forwaitandweight. First, the pair shows a highly signif-
icant AIC contrast in thewandeIsegments:∆AIC= 58.27 for
wand∆AIC= 66.89 foreI; the AIC contrast oftis smaller but
still well supports the target model (∆AIC= 9.35). A closer
look into the predicted smooth curve ofeIshows that the vowel
ofwaithas a slower onset than the one ofweight. Furthermore,
weighthas a more articulatedwonset as evidenced by higher
phone logits compared towait.
Figure 2b shows a homophone pair with substantial con-
trasts:male/mail. The AIC strongly supports the target mod-
els for all three segments, with the contrast being substantially
larger for the latter segments (eIandl) than for the first seg-
mentm. The same pattern is observed in the predicted smooth
curves: both words have very similar trajectories for the first
segmentm. The contrast becomes stronger later in the syllable,
where themailhas a faster onset for the diphthong,eI, and a
more clearly pronouncedlin the coda.
Figure 2c shows a pair with modest contrasts. In thebanned
andbandpair, three out of four segments show negative AICs,
suggesting that the models with word identity are not supported.
The smooth curves convey a consistent message: the trajecto-
ries are nearly identical across word types. However, there is
a modest AIC contrast in the [n] segment, and the credible in-
tervals overlap less later in the syllable, suggesting a slightly
stronger nasal for the wordbanned.
To summarize, GAM analysis of phone-logit trajectories al-
lows us to examine the effect of homophone identity on each
segment, controlling for word duration, speech source, and sur-
rounding words. One remaining question is why some pairs
540
Figure 3:Token-level Spectral logit GAM.
are realized more differently than the others? According to
the DLM, the realization of speech forms is modulated by the
meaning they carry. Therefore, the more different the meaning
is, the more distinct the phonetic realization. We explore this
hypothesis in the next analysis.
3.3. Spectral and CE logits
We study the relationship between form and meaning using the
same idea that underlies phone logits. By replacing the LDA
inputs with a token’s entire time-normalized spectrogram and
outputs with word identities, we can estimate how likely a given
token is classified to either member of a homophone pair in
form space. Likewise, using a token’s contextualized embed-
ding (CE) as input allows us to estimate the likelihood of each
word’s identity in the meaning space, thereby quantifying its se-
mantic discriminability. We call the logit scores in form space
thespectral logitsand the ones in meaning space theCE logits.
Two LDA models are trained for each homophone pair. One
computes the spectral logits, the other the CE logits. The aver-
age accuracy across 35 homophone pairs is .75 (SE= .010)
for classifying time-normalized spectrograms into word types,
and .99 (SE= .001) for classifying CEs. For comparison, the
random permutation baseline gives an accuracy of .65 (SE=
0.004).
A crucial property of these spectral and CE logits is that
they quantify how discriminable homophones are within pairs,
in the respective speech and meaning space, without providing
any information about their locations in the CE semantic space.
The question we now address with a GAM is whether this pure
discrimination measure is predictive of the spectral logits. We
fitted the model using a scaled-t distribution for the residuals,
with smooth terms for the CE logit, duration, and word fre-
quency (tokens of the same word share a frequency value), and
a tensor-product smooth for the probabilities of preceding and
following words, and indicator variables for preceding and sub-
sequent pauses.
Figure 3 presents the partial effects of the CE logits and
other covariates. CE logits show a generally increasing effect
on spectral logits, in line with the hypothesis that speech token
separability is partly shaped by semantic contrast within a ho-
mophone pair. In other words, the more distinct the context-
specific semantics of the homophones within a pair are, the
more easily their speech tokens can be correctly classified.
As for the other covariates, duration has little effect on the
spectral logits. After time normalization, there is little evidence
that word duration further shapes the differences in the phonetic
realization. The effect of frequency is essentially U-shaped,
possibly indicating that homophones with the most common
frequencies (the mean frequency, indicated by a vertical dashed
line) are somewhat less discriminable. Uninformative, ‘boring’
homophones may not need to be well-differentiated in articula-
tion. The final panel of Figure 3 clarifies that when the proba-
bilities of both the preceding and the following word are high,
spectral logits are larger. This suggests that tokens embedded
in more common collocations tend to have more typical realiza-
tions.
4. Discussion
This study examines the phonetic realization of English hetero-
graphic homophones, using time-normalized spectrograms for
investigating the segmental details of pronunciation. We col-
lected 200 tokens for each homophone in 35 homophone pairs
(14,000 tokens in total) and calculated time-normalized spec-
trograms and their corresponding contextualized embeddings
(CEs) using GPT-2. Not only do the time-normalized spec-
trograms already systematically predict the word types within
a homophone pair, but the segment-levelphone logits— how
likely a phone is produced at a given time — also reveal dif-
ferences between words in a homophone pair, e.g.,waithas a
slower vowel onset than the homophonicweight. We further
show that the differences in phonetic realization are positively
associated with the semantic discriminability at the token level,
after controlling for other speech-related covariates.
Taken together, these findings suggest that homophones are
only approximately homophonous: the exact realizations are
co-determined by the token-level meanings they carry. These
fine-grained differences are inherent in the speech experiences
that shape speakers’ subliminal knowledge of language. More
generally, the influence of token-specific semantics on realiza-
tion is not limited to homophones, as studies have shown that it
also modulates the tonal realization of Mandarin words[17, 40].
This subliminal, implicit knowledge can be understood in the
context of basic language cognition [41], defined as implicit
and unconscious cognition acquired through massive exposure
for fast and automatic speech processing. The Discriminative
Lexicon Model thus provides a computational proposal for such
basic lexical cognition. Following this line of reasoning, time-
normalized spectrograms and CEs can be incorporated into the
production and comprehension networks in DLM to model the
subliminal knowledge underlying the processing of English het-
erographic homophones.
5. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the European Research Council
(ERC) Grant No. ADG 101054902 (Subliminal).
541
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI was used to polish portions of the manuscript for
language clarity.