When “Yeah” Means “Not Quite”:
Multimodal Detection of Backchannels Expressing Incomplete Understanding
Olcay TürkID 1,3,∗∗, Stefan LazarovID 2,3, Yu WangID 1,3, Angela GrimmingerID 2,3,
Hendrik Buschmeier ID 1,3, Petra WagnerID 1,3
1 Faculty of Linguistics and Literary Studies, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany
2 Faculty of Arts and Humanities, Paderborn University, Paderborn, Germany
3 SFB/Transregio 318 ‘Constructing Explainability’, Paderborn & Bielefeld, Germany
olcay.tuerk@uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract
Multimodal backchannels are fundamental to conversational
grounding and understanding. However, backchannels do not al-
ways transparently reflect the interlocutor’s actual cognitive state.
“Incongruent backchannels”, where the observable feedback im-
plies understanding although there is no genuine understanding,
are a potential source of ambiguity in any interaction. Using
acoustic, head movement, and discourse-related data from 45
naturalistic dyadic interactions, we investigate whether incongru-
ent and congruent backchannels show systematically different
properties using a classification task. Results show that these
backchannels are indeed separable based on multimodal fea-
tures. Incongruent backchannels are typically characterised by
more neutral head movement configurations and lower acoustic
dynamism, while discursive cues strongly influence the classifi-
cation. Overall, the findings suggest a relatively reduced effort in
the signalling of incongruent backchannels.
Index Terms: Backchannels, Multimodality, Acoustics, Expla-
nation, Understanding
1. Introduction
Backchannels are central to dialogue organisation, serving as
signals of interlocutor attention, understanding, and stance with-
out disrupting the ongoing turn [1, 2, 3]. Through backchan-
nels, interlocutors aim to co-construct mutual understanding and
ensure conversational grounding [4]. Importantly, backchannel-
ing is an inherently multimodal behaviour where vocalisations
(e.g., “okay”, “mhm”) systematically interact with non-verbal
behaviours such as head movements, gaze, and facial expres-
sions [5]. In particular, head nods have been shown to play an
important role, often co-occurring with or substituting vocal
backchannels [5, 6, 7]. Such combinations of feedback signals
regulate information flow and enable interlocutors to adapt their
speech based on moment-by-moment displays of understanding
[8, 9, 10, 11].
Yet, verbal, non-verbal or multimodal backchannels exhibit
considerablevariabilityandambiguityasprosodicandcontextual
differences may affect their interpretation [5, 12, 13,14,15,16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. For instance, backchannels with higher pitch
and intensity may signal stronger agreement and positive stance,
whereas lower values of these and creaky voice may indicate
addressee’s reduced engagement and lack of confidence [13, 22]
(for contextual examples: [4]). Regardless, backchannels’ accu-
rate interpretation relies on their meaning being transparent to
the other interlocutor in real time. This is not always achieved in
**indicates the corresponding author.
a straightforward manner in spontaneous interactions, especially
for positive backchannels [1, 4, 23, 24]. For instance, an inter-
locutor might produce a positive backchannel, e.g., “mhm” with
a nod, although they did not fully understand. We refer to this
type of backchannel use in which the surface level signal does
notreflecttheunderlyingstateofunderstandingas“incongruent”
backchannels. They can occur as an attempt to save face (e.g.,
avoiding initiation, [25, 26, 27]) or to manage cognitive load,
hoping that an information gap might be closed soon (e.g., pre-
ferring progressivity; [28, 29]). Because these implicit functions
are not necessarily available to the other interlocutor, they can
lead to misalignment between the interlocutors’ belief about
their underlying cognitive states, risking communicative success.
Overall, little is known about incongruent uses of backchannels,
especially when it comes to their formal properties. Although
earlier works reported variability in the realisations of backchan-
nels, it remains unclear which (non-)verbal cues reliably signal
reduced or falsely displayed understanding.
1.1. The present study
The present study investigates whether incongruent backchan-
nels can be systematically characterised based on observable
multimodal behaviour. We hypothesise that the acoustic quality
of backchannels, the properties of head movements co-occurring
in their vicinity, and the organisation of discourse structure play
a role in the identification of incongruent use, in line with the
findings in [9]. To test this hypothesis, we trained a classifier
to tell apart incongruent backchannels from congruent ones
using a wide list of features derived from multimodal cues on
a dataset of board game explanations [30]. Our goal is not to
train the best performing model per se, but rather to identify the
most important features predicting incongruence as quantified
by Shapley additive explanations [31]. In particular, we focus on
whetherdistinctfeaturesetscontributetocorrectidentificationof
incongruence, suggesting specific cueing strategies, or whether
it is the increased/decreased values of the same features that
determine incongruence.
2. Method
2.1. Data
The present study analysed data sampled from the MUNDEX
corpus[30].Itcontains87dyadicinteractionsaboutaboardgame
in German which were annotated for a variety of multimodal
events. The corpus was created to investigate multimodal signals
of understanding of explanations [9,32]. In the interactions, an
explainer (ER) explained a board game to an explainee (EE).
4545
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-713
Figure 1:Recording setup from the side angle camera used in
the video-recall task.
The ER learned the rules of the game on their own a few days
prior to the interactions without any guidance. They received no
instructions except for the sequential order of the explanation,
(i.e., explanation followed by gameplay; for details, see [30]).
The actual interaction dynamics of the dyads were otherwise not
controlled for. The interactions were video-recorded from six
different camera angles (see Figure 1) at 50 fps (1920×1080 ).
Audio was recorded with an earset microphone per participant.
2.2. Participants
45 interactions with complete sets of annotations were selected
from the corpus for the analysis (Section 2.4). Each interaction
was approximately 30 minutes long, and consisted of 17 ERs
explaining the board game to 2 or 3 different EEs each, as
per the corpus design intended to study individual variation in
explanation styles [30]. All participants were native speakers of
German. Participation was not controlled for age and gender.
2.3. Establishing moments and levels of understanding
After the explanation was completed, both the ER and the EE
had a follow-up “video-recall” task [33] which they carried out
separately. They were instructed to verbally comment on the
EE’slevelofunderstandingmoment-by-momentastheywatched
their own interaction from the side angle camera (Figure 1).
That is, at any moment they recognised a change in the EE’s
level of understanding, they paused the video and left a spoken
comment (e.g.,here I did not understand). One annotator cate-
gorised the EE’s comments into three levels of understanding:
(i) understanding (𝑁=230 ), expressing complete understand-
ing; (ii) partial-understanding (𝑁=141 ), expressing incomplete
understanding (e.g.,I understood some of it, but I was still a bit
unsure); (iii) non-understanding (𝑁=137 ), expressing confu-
sion/no understanding took place (inter-rater agreement on 10%
of the data: Cohen’s𝜅=0.90 ). The exact moments when the EE
stoppedthevideotocommentwereconsideredtobethepointsin
time where these levels of understanding substantiated, and their
timestampswereimportedintothemainannotationset.Thistask
served as a self-annotation task establishing a subjective ground
truth for the level of understanding of the EE.
Video-recall tasks have been shown to be effective in cap-
turing moment-by-moment understanding (also with limitations)
[33]. This procedure was chosen because tasks that are more
objective, such as post-tests or between-phase tests, do not en-
able us to pinpoint exactly when (non-)understanding occurred.
These tasks also disrupt the natural flow of interaction, making
participantsmoreself-awareandawareofthetask.OnlytheEE’s
comments on their understanding were used in the present study.
Table 1:A summary of descriptors and derived functionals for
head movements and discourse.
Descriptor Reference Functionals
3D head acceleration
(px/s2)
Total head movement
fromnoselandmarkdis-
placement Central tendency and
variability (e.g., IQR),
extremal values (e.g.,
0–20 percentiles),
temporal dynamics
(e.g., upleveltime),
event-based (e.g.,
mean peak height),
trend/drift (e.g., linear
slope), frequency
domain (e.g., high
frequency power)
Head pitch angle (°) Vertical tilt of the nose-
chin axis on the image
plane (rotation around
the𝑥-axis)
Angular acceleration
of head pitch (px/s2)
with peak summary in-
formation, e.g., height
Nodding-related kine-
matics from the second
derivative of head pitch
angle
Head roll angle (°) Tilt of left–right eye
horizontal axis on the
image plane (rotation
around the𝑧-axis)
How long the current
topic was talked about
For details on
backward-looking (EE)
and forward-looking
functions (ER), see the
annotation scheme in
[37] based on [38, 39]
Topic duration
Time distance to the
nearestpastmentionof
the current topic
Distance to nearest
past mention
How a segment relates
toapreviousdiscourse
for the EE
Discourse Density for
EE
How a segment pro-
jects future discourse
obligations and expec-
tations for the ER
Discourse Density for
ER
2.4. Annotations and feature extraction
Speech was transcribed automatically using either Whisper [34]
or WebMaus [35], and then manually corrected. The manual
correction process also included the transcription of backchan-
nels that were missed out by the automatic speech recognition.
Our subset of the corpus contained4842backchannels in total.
Our analysis did not distinguish between lexical and non-lexical
backchannels.Anyannotationorinformationrelatedtobackchan-
nelsisreferredtoas‘multimodalcues’fromhereon.Asubsetof
multimodal cues described the acoustic features of the backchan-
nels in line with our goals. We extracted these acoustic features
using openSMILE with eGeMAPS (v2.0) and default prosody
configurations,whichledtoatotalof88features(forthefulllist:
[36]).
The second subset of multimodal cues came from head
movements. We defined 2-second intervals either way from the
onset of backchannels (4 seconds) as our window of interest
for the head movement analysis. That is, head movements were
considered associated with backchannels only if they occurred
within these windows of interest, which was motivated by theo-
ries of cognitive temporal presence [40] as well as prior studies
linking understanding to multimodal cues [9]. These 4-second
chunks were extracted from the videos of interactions focusing
on the EE’s face. Facial landmarks were then detected using
MediaPipe’s Face Mesh solution[41]. Four low-leveldescriptors
astime-serieswerecalculatedfromtheselandmarks,whichwere
summarised via a list of time-collapsed functionals (Table 1).
Only functionals with meaningful interpretations for the respec-
tive low-level descriptors were kept in the final list (e.g., slopes
for acceleration were excluded), leading to 134 functionals in
total.Kinematicdatawereintendedtocapturepropertiesofhead
nods as they typically co-occur with backchannels (although we
do not have discrete head nod annotations).
4546
The third set of cues pertained to the discourse organisation
of the interactions. The corpus contained annotations of which
game rule was being explained at any time, i.e., topics. These
topics were further segmented into dialogue acts based on the
communicative functions of utterances. The annotations had a
multidimensional taxonomy but we selected only the highest di-
mensionswhichdescribehowasegmentrelatestodiscourse,i.e.,
forward and backward-looking functions (see Table 1, bottom).
Derived functionals related to topic duration and the density
of these functions aimed to capture the discourse complexity
backchannels were produced in.
Finally, each topic was associated with a level of understand-
ing acquired from the video-recalls. If there was a video-recall
comment of (non-)understanding within the duration of a topic
or 15 seconds around a topic (mean topic duration=9.5s ), the
topic also carried the same understanding label. In turn, any
backchannels occurring within the topic also inherited the under-
standing label. If a positive backchannel indicated understanding
(e.g., mhm), and the EE confirmed their understanding in the
video-recall task, the backchannel was labelled as “congruent”
(𝑁=675 ). On the other hand, if the EE reported partial or
non-understanding in the video-recall although the backchannel
signalled otherwise in the actual interaction, the backchannel
was labelled as “incongruent” (𝑁=809 ). We did not distinguish
between different pragmatic meanings of backchannels (e.g.,
simple continuation or profound comprehension), and investi-
gated them as cues on the surface level as observed by the other
interlocutor [1,16]. We do not have many examples of negative
backchannels in the dataset; therefore, they were not included in
the study.
Ifatopiccouldnotbeassignedalevelofunderstanding(e.g.,
no video-recall comment), the topic and the backchannels within
wereexcludedfromthedata( 𝑁=1615 ).Thebackchannelswere
also excluded if motion tracking failed to return landmarks for
2 seconds, or if their duration was too short for acoustic feature
extraction. For a more stable analysis, we also sampled the top
20 most frequently occurring lexical forms in which the top 3
were “okay” (29%), “ja” (20%), and “mhm” (19%). After these
exclusions, there were1435 backchannels with understanding
labels in the data.
2.5. Analysis
We trained a gradient-boosted decision tree classifier (XGBoost)
as our model for the binary classification of congruent and in-
congruent backchannels. It was optimised for the area under
the precision–recall curve metric due to moderate class imbal-
ance. The classifier was trained within a cross-validated pipeline
that jointly handled feature preprocessing and selection. It in-
cluded log-transformation (log1p mapping) and robust scaling
(i.e., median-IQR standardisation) for discourse features with
duration values, and only robust scaling for the rest. Features
with low variance (var<0.1 after scaling) were removed to
reduce noise. To account for the class imbalance, the classifier
was configured with a class weight parameter calculated as the
ratio of negative to positive instances in the training data (0.83).
Preprocessingwasperformedindependentlywithineachtraining
fold of a nested cross-validation pipeline to avoid leakage. A
7-fold outer validation loop was used in the evaluation, whereas
hyperparameter optimisation was done exclusively within an-
other 7-fold inner loop via a randomised search (70 random
configurations) with average precision as the primary selection
criterion. Finally, the model was also evaluated on a validation
set that amounts to15% of the total samples. This validation
Table2:Estimatesofmodelgeneralisationperformancein7-fold
cross-validation.
Metric Mean SD
Average Precision0.73±0.04
ROC-AUC0.71±0.04
Brier Score (neg.)−0.21±0.01
Log Loss (neg.)−0.62±0.04
Precision0.67±0.02
Recall0.70±0.03
F1-score0.68±0.02
Accuracy0.65±0.02
Table 3:Classification result on the reserved validation set.
Precision Recall F1 Support
Congruent 0.69 0.71 0.70 98
Incongruent 0.76 0.74 0.75 118
Accuracy=0.73216
set was reserved prior to training and strictly never seen by the
model. To interpret the classification results, we performed a
SHAPanalysistoestimatefeaturecontributionstotheclassifier’s
output[31].Inthisanalysis,eachfeatureisassignedashareofthe
prediction outcome based on its contribution (i.e., SHAP value),
estimating each feature’s responsibility for a change away from a
baseline. Positive SHAP values influence the prediction towards
incongruence, and negative SHAP values drive the prediction
away from incongruence.
3. Results
The classifier showed a stable class separation in our evalu-
ation procedures. In the cross-validation, the model achieved
moderate discriminative performance, and low variability in per-
formance across folds suggested robust generalisation (Table 2).
The evaluation on the reserved validation set returned highly
comparable results (Table 3), which confirmed the stability of
the model outside of the cross-validation procedure. Incongruent
backchannels were predicted with higher precision than their
congruent counterparts, while similar recall values suggested
that the model did not favour one class at the expense of the
other.Overall,giventhesimilarperformancesofunseendataand
cross-validation, the observed patterns are not likely to reflect
overfitting. Rather, congruent and incongruent backchannels
exhibit systematic differences as captured by our multimodal
features.
The SHAP analysis indicated that Mean Head Pitch angle
was the most influential feature in the model (Figure 2). Its
lower values were predominantly associated with incongruent
backchannels while increased values tended to reduce incon-
gruent backchannel probability. Low values corresponded to a
more upright head posture with no strong upward/downward
angle,suggestinganeutralstanceoftheheadduringincongruent
backchannels. Increased values indicated either strong angle
changes (e.g., nodding) or head bows diverting attention to game
pieces resulting in reduced eye-contact.
The discourse cues Topic Duration and Distance to (nearest)
Past Mention (DPM from here on) were the next two most in-
fluential features. Prolonged topics increased the probability of
incongruent backchannels. DPM had a less consistent contribu-
tion where its low values (recent mentions) were ambiguous but
its increased values (e.g., past mention was longer ago) could
increase the probability of either type of backchannels. This was
4547
0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Shap value
Hammarberg Index
Min Pitch Acc Prominence
F0 Falling Slope Var.
Mean Head Pitch Acc
Head Pitch Linear Trend
F3 (rel. F0) Amplitude Var.
Mean Abs. Head Roll
Mean F2 Frequency
Sound Level
Shimmer Var.
Median F0 (semitone)
Median Head Pitch Acc.
Distance to Past Mention
T opic Duration
Mean Head Pitch
Low
HighFeature value
Figure 2:SHAP summary plot for feature contributions to model
output (log-odds).
notentirelysurprisingasatleastonequartileofbackchannelswas
for newly introduced topics. Moreover, the DPM’s non-uniform
effect was conditioned by Topic Duration as together they par-
ticipated in the model’s strongest interaction (0.03 log-odds). In
a further examination through quantile-based categorisation of
both features at the classifier level, we observed that incongru-
ent backchannel prediction was more likely in short topics that
were mentioned a longer time ago, e.g., a brief, not so detailed
topic, (0.06 difference in predicted probabilities), and in newly
introduced long topics, e.g., a long and dense topic (0.09).
In line with our focus, to better probe features leading to
stable decision patterns, we cross-examined SHAP contributions
with model confidence. From the predicted probabilities in the
model, high confidence cases for both incongruent (𝑃 >=0.8 )
and congruent (𝑃 <=0.2 ) observations were extracted as two
subsets: confident-incongruent and confident-congruent subsets
respectively. For the confident-incongruent subset, features with
the largest positive SHAP values increased the log-odds of
incongruent backchannels, whereas for the confident-congruent
subset, the largest negative SHAP values reduced the log-odds
of incongruent backchannels (Figure 3). Ranked by magnitude,
the top three contributors remained the same in both subsets,
although Topic Duration and Mean Head Pitch were stronger
in confident-congruent predictions. However, we also observed
asymmetries in feature contributions where certain features did
not contribute equally and in the same direction, suggesting
class-dependent decision mechanisms (see shading in Figure 3).
Ingeneral,ourfindingshintatreducedeffortforincongruent
backchannels. For instance, high Shimmer Variability, which
can be associated with more dynamic phonation and expressive
modulation, reduced incongruent backchannel probability (see
Figure 2 for value direction). Other amplitude related measures,
higher equivalent sound level (Leq) and lower stability of the
lowest loudness region (Loudness Perc. Range 0–20), were also
more likely to suppress the likelihood of incongruent backchan-
nels. Similarly, F0-related measures such as lower pitch register
(Median F0), which can be interpreted as lower prosodic promi-
0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
Mean SHAP value (log-odds)
Sound Level
Head Pitch High-Level Time (75%)
F3 Amp. Var. (rel. F0)
Head Roll Irregularity (reg-err)
Loudness Perc. Range 0-2
Head Pitch Acc Neg. Peak Height
F0 Var. Slope
Median Head Pitch Acc
Mean Absolute Head Roll
Median F0
Shimmer Var.
Distance to Past Mention
Mean Head Pitch
T opic Duration
T oward congruent
T oward incongruent
Figure 3:Mean SHAP values (log-odds) for features driving
confident-congruent (blue) and confident-incongruent (orange)
predictions at approximately±0.1 cutoff (ranked by magnitude).
Horizontal shading indicates features that asymmetrically influ-
ence the prediction direction (heuristically).
nence or weaker affective stance, and more variable falling F0
during segments (F0 Falling SlopeVar.)were strongerpredictors
of incongruence.
Reduced effort/dynamism was also observable in the kine-
matic features. For instance, lower average magnitude of head
tilt (Mean Absolute Head Roll) and lower deviation from linear
motion(HeadRollIrregularity),indicatingsmoothermotion,and
amoreuprightandneutralstancefortheheadincreasedtheprob-
abilityofincongruentbackchannels.Ontheotherhand,increased
strengthofheadpitch(angular)deceleration,i.e.,downwardnods
(Head Pitch Acc., Neg. Peak Height) and less sustained head
pitch elevation (Head Pitch High-Level uptime at 75%) tended
to reduce the likelihood of incongruent backchannels.
4. Discussion
The present study explored whether incongruent backchannels
can be differentiated from congruent ones using acoustic, kine-
matic, and discourse-related features via a classification task.
The interpretability analysis of the classification results indicates
that incongruent backchannels are not merely noise but reflect
systematic behavioural patterns. A key observation is that these
backchannelscanbeassociatedwithcuesconsistentwithreduced
expressive effort (although note that feature interpretations are
probabilistic, not deterministic). Collectively, they can be charac-
terised by reduced phonatory variability and amplitude/energy
dynamics, and a less modulated, more neutral head pose and
movement. Rather than signalling high engagement or a confi-
dent stance, this constrained expressive investment suggests a
feedback strategy that is only minimally committed enough to
sustain conversational flow. Further, increased cost of processing
and grounding as captured by discourse complexity features
predicts incongruent backchannels more, highlighting them as
adaptivebehaviourundercognitiveload.Therefore,wespeculate
that similar analyses can be used to detect interaction segments
with increased cognitive load. More generally, the present study
challenges categorical analyses of backchannels by showing evi-
dencethattheyalsoencodegradientvariations,exposingalatent
structure in backchanneling behav