Exploring Active Sampling Strategies
for Pairwise Comparisons in Speech Synthesis Evaluation
Cassia Valentini-Botinhao ID 1,∗∗, Andrea Lorena Aldana Blanco ID 1, Dan Wells ID 1, Aidan Pine ID 2,
Korin Richmond ID 1
1 The Centre for Speech Technology Research, The University of Edinburgh, UK
2 National Research Council Canada, Canada
cassiavb@gmail.com
Abstract
Subjective tests are the gold standard for text-to-speech evalu-
ation. Tests based on preference tasks are favoured by partic-
ipants and are less prone to listener-dependent biases. Despite
their advantages, preference-based tests are less widely adopted
than absolute rating tests like MOS due to the misconception
that all possible pairs must be tested in order for results to be
reliable. In this paper, we compare different approaches for
pair selection in AB and BWS tests, contrasting random selec-
tion with two active sampling methods: a sorting-based method
and an information-gain-based method called ASAP. We found
that the ASAP method reveals more significant differences com-
pared to others, and that BWS tests are more effective than AB
tests for the same test duration. This is evident in both num-
ber of significant differences and system rank correlation, with
ASAP further amplifying the improvements.
Index Terms: speech synthesis evaluation, active sampling
1. Introduction
Over the last ten years, speech synthesis technology has seen
significant advancements. Unlike a decade ago, when evalua-
tion was often an afterthought [1], it has now become a very ac-
tive field of research [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] that led to refined pro-
cedures and the establishment of improved guidelines [10, 11].
Speech synthesis evaluation is based on objective metrics and
subjective tests. Objective metrics, also known as instrumen-
tal metrics, are particularly attractive due to reproducibility and
the ease with which they can be calculated. This makes them
ideal for assessing large datasets without incurring significant
additional costs. Instrumental metrics are reproducible and ar-
guably unbiased, but are not necessarily accurate, i.e. they do
not always reflect human judgment [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. For
this reason subjective evaluation via listening tests is the gold
standard.
In a listening test, participants are asked to listen to speech
and indicate their impressions of it. The most common listening
test used for speech synthesis evaluation is the MOS test. MOS
tests follow the Absolute Category Rating protocol proposed in
the ITU recommendation P.800 [17] where participants listen to
stimuli one at a time and rate them using a Likert scale ranging
from one (labelled “bad”) to five (labelled “excellent”). MOS
values are considered absolute because participants rate stimuli
one at a time, but in reality a stimuli might vary depending on
other stimuli used in the test [18]. MOS is also affected by
listener biases on how to utilise the Likert scale.
Preference tests are a more ‘objective’ form of subjective
evaluation. The most common type of preference test is the AB
**indicates the corresponding author.
test where participants are asked to provide a preference over
two elements and choose which (A or B) is best in terms of
a specific dimension (usually naturalness for TTS evaluation).
Ratings from AB tests tend to exhibit much lower variance than
MOS [19, 2, 20]. A more efficient alternative to AB testing is
the Best-Worst Scaling (BWS) test [21]. In the BWS test par-
ticipants are asked to choose which is the best and worst out
ofMelements. While the answer to an AB question provides
one preference, a BWS question with four elements provides
five (the best element is preferred over all other three, and two
out of the remaining three are preferred over the worst). Similar
to AB tests, BWS tests have also been show to be superior to
MOS: the authors in [22] found that a BWS test to be as reli-
able as Likert scale with only 30% of the annotations [22]. This
particular result has been observed for sentiment annotation of
text, where participants can compare different elements simulta-
neously. Applying BWS to audio stimuli presents an additional
challenge, as it requires more working memory from the partic-
ipants. Unlike text, audio elements cannot be presented all at
once and must be compared sequentially. However, it has been
recently observed [23] that MOS, AB, and BWS applied to the
evaluation of TTS yield broadly similar results and are therefore
equally valid.
Although both AB and BWS have been shown to be more
efficient than MOS, they are not as widely adopted, mainly due
to two misconceptions. Firstly, there is a belief that the MOS
test can provide an absolute numerical value that reflects a sys-
tem’s ‘performance’. However, as previously discussed, a sys-
tem’s MOS value is not an absolute performance metric and
should not be compared across listening tests or across time
[18, 24]. Secondly, there is a misconception that to determine
system rankings with a preference test, it is necessary to com-
pare all possible pairs of systems, rapidly inflating the duration
of the test. It is, however, possible to reliably estimate system
level scores and rankings from incomplete coverage by employ-
ing rating models like ELO [25], TrueSkill [26] and Bradley-
Terry [27]. System scores can also be derived from BWS test
by either converting BWS questions into pairwise comparisons
and applying pairwise rating systems or by adopting rating sys-
tems that can deal with multiple items such as the Plackett-Luce
ranking model[28].
In this paper we build upon the work described in [23]
which compared the system ranking results obtained from
MOS, AB and BWS. While that work focused on attesting the
validity of using BWS for listening test evaluation, in this paper
we look at further improving its efficiency. Inspired by the work
described in [29], where authors apply a sorting-based method
for optimising a large scale evaluation of TTS systems using
AB testing, we evaluate the use of a more complex active sam-
6118
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-446
pling method [30] and extend the use of pairwise sampling ap-
proaches to BWS tests. In particular, we are interested in eval-
uating the performance of these tests with less responses with
the view of identifying and developing more effective evalua-
tion for applications where few listeners are available, such as
TTS systems for endangered languages [31, 32].
2. Sampling approaches for pairwise
comparison
The most naive way to select pairs is to include all possible
pairwise comparisons. This results inN∗(N−1)/2com-
parisons, where N is the number of systems. ForN=10this
results in 45 comparisons but forN=20it totals 190 compar-
isons. While feasible for internal evaluation, this approach is
impractical for constructing large leaderboards involving many
systems. Another straightforward approach is nearest condi-
tion (NC) sampling, where only systems that are adjacent in an
estimated ranking are compared. Both methods fall under the
category of passive algorithms.
A prominent category of sampling methods are those based
on sorting. Like in NC, these algorithms rely on system sort-
ing and focus on comparing elements that are close to each
other. Unlike NC sampling, sorting-based algorithms are ac-
tive as they modify the rank depending on the comparisons that
are made. Sorting based methods are widely used because they
are easy to compute. However, they rely on an initial guess of
element ranking, which might lead to non-optimal pair compar-
isons. Nevertheless they have been shown to work well in prac-
tice. Of particular interest to us is the work described in [29]
which proposes a merge-rank (MR) based sorting method that
relies on a comparison algorithm that takes into account a con-
fidence interval and a termination criterion based on a statistical
test. They show that their method radically reduces the number
of unique pairs to be compared without loss of accuracy.
Another category of sampling methods are information-
gain approaches [30]. These methods focus on requesting com-
parisons that maximise information gain. A posterior distribu-
tion of the systems’ scores is calculated for a range of possi-
ble observations and the method selects the next comparison
based on a metric for information gain. That is, the metric in-
forms the method which pairs would be more informative to
compare. These methods tend to be more precise than sorting
approaches but they are computationally expensive and slow as
they tend to be sequential, i.e. only one pair is requested at a
time. To address these shortcomings, the authors in [30] pro-
pose an information-gain method called ASAP. ASAP relies on
Kullback-Leibler divergence between prior and posterior dis-
tribution to measure expected information gain. In contrast to
other approaches, ASAP is capable of requesting several pairs at
once for each iteration, which makes it appropriate for dynamic
listening tests. This is done via the construction of a minimum
spanning tree, a subset of edges that connect all nodes together
such that the total edge weight is minimised, where tree nodes
are systems, edges are pairs, and weights are the inverse of the
expected information gain. The authors propose accelerating
calculations by estimating the expected information gain selec-
tively for only the most confusable pairs but ensuring that each
system is included in the comparisons at least once per itera-
tion. They found ASAP provides superior performance on both
synthetic (constructed) and real data for image and video qual-
ity assessment via pairwise comparisons, while also not being
computationally expensive.
3. Data
We evaluate the performance of sampling approaches following
the procedure in [30]. This involves supplying requested com-
parisons by sampling from a large bank of ratings collected in
preliminary tests that cover all possible pairwise/tuple combi-
nations.
3.1. Stimuli preparation
In accordance with previous evaluation studies [18, 5], we uti-
lized speech data from the Blizzard Challenge 2013 [33], which
includes TTS systems from older technologies. Although evalu-
ating sampling strategies with the latest TTS systems that have
arguably approached human speech parity would be advanta-
geous, we deliberately chose this dataset because of the system
selection. It includes systems that are known to be very simi-
lar to each other as well as those that are distinctively different,
both in terms of MOS and preference metrics.
In both the original challenge and the evaluation studies,
only a small subset (up to 30) of the test utterances was used
for evaluating naturalness, the rest were either not utilised or
used for speaker similarity evaluation. We designed our test to
include as many sentences as possible while keeping it under
40minutes, using90out of the100test utterances for creat-
ing questions for the tests and six of the remaining for listener
exclusion.
We evaluated stimuli from 10 ‘systems’: natural speech,
five older TTS systems from the original challenge (N, C, K, M
and B), and four newer systems provided by the authors of [18].
Three of the older TTS systems were selected according to [18]:
a unit selection system (N), a hidden Markov model-based sys-
tem (C), and a hybrid system (K), each representing the state-
of-the-art technology in 2013 according to the challenge results.
We also included two other systems from the original 2013 chal-
lenge: a different hybrid synthesis system (M) and another unit
selection system (B). In the results from the 2013 challenge,
system M ranked similarly to K among the highest, while B
was rated among the lowest. The newer TTS systems that did
not take part in the original challenge are neural network sys-
tems based on Tacotron [34] and FastPitch [35]. Each model
was paired with either a WaveNet [36] or Parallel WaveGAN
[37] vocoder, resulting in four different systems. All stimuli
were kindly provided by the authors of [18].
3.2. Test Design
The AB preference test consisted of ten sections of nine AB
questions each (90 questions overall). Each test had two ques-
tions for every possible pair of the 45 system combinations,
with the system order varying between them. Each question
contained stimuli from two systems for the same utterance. We
used a Latin square design to assign utterances to questions, ro-
tating them across rows to form nine different test setups, each
assigned to a participant. In this way, across all listening tests,
every system is heard synthesising every utterance, minimising
the effect of text prompts on ratings.
The BWS test contained 30 questions, organized into three
sections of 10 questions each. Each question included stimuli
of the same utterance from four different systems. Participants
chose the most and least natural stimuli. Each test included
one question from 30 out of the 210 possible four-system tu-
ples, covering all tuples across seven participants. We used
feature-based submodular optimization [38, 39] to balance the
frequency of individual systems and system pairs across tuples.
6119
This ensured each participant ranked a similar set of systems.
The 90 utterances were spread so that each appeared once across
three different tests. To achieve this, we created 21 different test
configurations (3 for each of the 7 sets of 30 tuples). Each par-
ticipant was assigned one configuration.
3.3. Participants recruitment
We recruited 60 participants for each test using Prolific with
the following criteria: native speakers of English residing in
the United States. A participant’s data was excluded if they
failed more than one validation question and if their scores in
participants’ consistency metrics fell more than one standard
deviation below the group mean. The number of participants
obtained after exclusion was: 54 for AB and 57 for BWS.
4. Evaluation
4.1. Pair sampling approaches
To analyse how responses change depending on the question
selection we compared three approaches for pair sampling: ran-
dom, merge-rank (MR) [29] and ASAP [30].
In therandomapproach we randomly selected 9 pairs at
every iteration and repeated this for 400 iterations. We ran this
process 50 times with different random seeds.
We implemented the sequential version of the merge-rank
algorithm proposed in [29] using confidence=0.05 as in the
original paper and a varying number of maximum questions
per pair (m). We present results for four settings:MR1-R
(m=54 with a random initial ranking) andMR1(m=54),MR2
(m=108) andMR3(m=216). In MR1, MR2 and MR3, we set
the initial ranking to match the exact final ranking derived from
the corresponding listening test (AB or BWS). These settings il-
lustrate performance in the best-case scenario, where the initial
guess is accurate. The MR method was run until convergence
for 50 times with different random seeds. The values chosen for
mwere motivated by the number of distinct answers collected
for each pair in the original test (108).
To construct theASAPapproach we used the authors’ im-
plementation of ASAP [30] with the selective information-gain
calculation and batch mode, as we found it provided slightly
better results with additional gains in speed. We ran the ASAP
algorithm for 400 iterations, in each iteration 9 pairs were re-
quested to be compared. We ran this 50 times with different
random seeds each time.
4.2. Question retrieval
When a pair is requested to be compared we retrieve a random
question to answer that request. Here, ‘question’ refers to the
listening test question a participant answered in the test. A ques-
tion is therefore defined uniquely by: the two (or four in the case
of BWS) systems involved, the speech stimuli, and the answer a
particular participant provided. From the retrieved question and
its corresponding answer we update the scoring (or the compari-
son algorithm in the case of MR). For all experiments presented
here we performed question retrieval with replacement.
In the case of the BWS test, for every requested pair we
retrieved a random BWS question that contained that pair. For
the batch mode case where multiple pairs were requested at the
same time, we performed a greedy search to select the minimum
number of BWS questions that involved all requested pairs. We
found that this provided the best result over selecting one BWS
question for each pair in the batch. Note that, unlike in the
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
number of AB questions
0
10
20
30
40number significant differences
random
MR1-R
MR1
MR2
MR3
ASAP
Figure 1:Number of significantly different pairs as a function
of AB questions. 45 is the maximum possible number.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
number of AB questions
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0rank correlation
random
MR1-R
ASAP
Figure 2:Rank correlation to final rank obtained with all ques-
tions as a function of AB questions.
AB test where a pair request results in a pair being answered,
there is no guarantee that a BWS question will address the pair
request, as it could be that neither system in the pair is ranked
best or worst. However, a BWS question will provide additional
information about other pairs involving those systems and the
best and worst ranked.
4.3. Metrics
We calculated the following two metrics: the number of signif-
icant differences observed, and the rank correlation (Kendall)
between system scores obtained via pair sampling to system
scores obtained with all possible pair combinations. The num-
ber of significant differences was calculated from confidence
intervals derived from the standard deviation of the systems’
scores estimated by TrueSkill [26, 30]. Rank correlation was
calculated from system scores estimated by TrueSkill for the
random and ASAP cases and from intermediate resorted rank-
ings of the MR method.
These metrics were calculated for every iteration in the ran-
dom and ASAP case, with 9 pairs requested per iteration. For
the MR case we calculated these metrics after each pair was
tested. In the MR case the same pair gets requested multiple
times until either convergence (given the confidence and bias
parameters) or the maximum number of requests is reached, be-
fore moving to the next pair.
4.4. Results
4.4.1. Sampling approaches
Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4 show the number of significant differences and
rank correlation in the AB and BWS tests respectively obtained
by each of the sampling methods. We do not show rank corre-
lation curves for MR1, MR2 and MR3 as these are very close
to 1.0 given that the initial rank order is derived from the ref-
erence ranking used in the correlation calculation. We present
the ASAP and random results with dashed and solid lines to re-
6120
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
number of BWS questions
0
10
20
30
40number significant differences
random
MR1-R
MR1
MR2
MR3
ASAP
Figure 3:Number of significantly different pairs as a function
of BWS questions. 45 is the maximum possible number.
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
number of BWS questions
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0rank correlation
random
MR1-R
ASAP
Figure 4:Rank correlation to final rank obtained with all ques-
tions as a function of BWS questions.
flect the mean across the 50 runs and the shaded area to report
the confidence interval estimated via bootstrapping. Curves for
different MR runs are shown separately, as each run retrieves a
different number of questions.
We can see that for both AB and BWS the ASAP method
performs the best, both in terms of revealing significant differ-
ences but also in terms of predicting the correct system ranking.
The MR curves consistently fall below the ASAP curves,
although they reach similar levels when the MR algorithm con-
verges for the AB test. This occurs regardless of the maximum
requests per pair (MR1, MR2, MR3) and whether the initial
ranking is random (MR1-R) or correct (MR1). We believe this
is due to the algorithm’s nature, which requests one pair exten-
sively before moving to the next. This leads to intermediate
scores based on incomplete coverage, limiting the number of
significant differences revealed before convergence.
The rank correlation curve for MR-R shows that even with
incomplete system coverage and an initial ranking that is ran-
dom, the MR converges to a ranking that is very similar to the
correct one. In practice, the initial ranking does not have to
be random as it can be estimated using objective metrics. As
a point of comparison we calculated rank correlation of SSL-
MOS [40], UTMOS [41], ScoreQ [42] and TTSDS [43] to our
data and obtained the following numbers for the AB test: 0.64,
0.56, 0.64 and 0.47 and BWS: 0.73, 0.64, 0.73 and 0.56 re-
spectively, with the caveat that the first three metrics were most
likely trained using part of the audio stimuli we evaluated.
4.4.2. Listening test type
Finally, we compare performance across tests for the same test
duration. We estimate test duration by using the average ques-
tion duration derived from the listening tests (16.9seconds for
an AB question and36.6seconds for a BWS question) and mul-
tiplying it by the number of requested questions. Figs. 5 and 6
plot the results from the metrics we used against the estimated
duration of each test. For simplicity, only the random and the
0 200 400 600 800 1000
duration (mins)
0
10
20
30
40number significant differences
AB random
AB ASAP
BWS random
BWS ASAP
Figure 5:Number of significantly different pairs as a function
of overall test duration.
0 200 400 600 800 1000
duration (mins)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0rank correlation
AB random
AB ASAP
BWS random
BWS ASAP
Figure 6:Rank correlation to final rank as a function of overall
test duration.
ASAP methods are included. As can be seen, the BWS test
provides a more accurate system ranking and identifies more
significant differences than the AB test for the same duration.
Although ASAP shows an advantage over random, it is not as
pronounced as the difference between BWS and AB. We be-
lieve that both BWS and ASAP would still be superior for eval-
uating TTS systems that are closer to each other (such it would
be with current state-of-the-art systems). The authors of the
ASAP algorithm demonstrated its superiority under these so-
called ‘small-range’ conditions [30].
5. Conclusions
We compared methods for evaluating speech synthesis systems
through comparison-based listening tests. Our evaluation in-
cluded two types of test: AB and BWS; and three approaches
for selecting system pairs: random selection, merge-rank (a
sorting-based method), and ASAP (an information-gain based
method). These approaches were compared by sampling data
derived from listening tests designed to cover all possible pair
combinations. We found that the ASAP method reveals more
significant differences than the other methods, especially in the
BWS test case. We contrasted approaches across tests and
found that BWS tests reveal more significant differences than
AB tests for the same test duration, with ASAP further en-
hancing this improvement. We observed that sampling from
a reduced number of listeners does not substantially impact our
conclusions. In practical terms, our results suggest that 10 par-
ticipants taking a 20-minute long BWS test with ASAP (200
minutes of listening effort) is equivalent to 40 participants tak-
ing a similarly long AB test (800 minutes). These findings have
implications for evaluation design, particularly in applications
where the number of listeners and test duration is limited.
6121
6. Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the UKRI Centre for Doc-
toral Training in Natural Language Processing (grant
EP/S022481/1), and the National Research Council of
Canada’s Ideation Fund: ‘Small Teams – Big Ideas’.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
The authors used ELM (Edinburgh Language Model)https:
//elm.edina.ac.ukin order to revise the manuscript.
They reviewed and edited the content as needed 