Joint Speech And Text Training For LLM-based End-To-End Spoken Dialogue
State Tracking
Katia Vendrame ID 1,∗, Bolaji Yusuf ID 1,∗, Santosh Kesiraju ID 1, ˇSimon Sedl´aˇcek ID 1, Oldˇrich
Plchot ID 1, Honza ˇCernock´y ID 1
1 Speech@FIT, Brno University of Technology, Czechia
ivendrame@fit.vut.cz, iyusuf@fit.vut.cz
Abstract
End-to-end spoken dialogue state tracking (DST) is made
difficult by having to handle speech input with scarce train-
ing data. Combining speech foundation encoders and large
language models has emerged as an approach to alleviate this
difficulty. Although this approach results in strong spoken
DST models, achieving state-of-the-art performance in realis-
tic multi-turn DST, it struggles to generalize across domains and
requires annotated spoken DST training data for each domain of
interest. However, collecting such data for every target domain
is both costly and difficult. Noting that textual DST data is more
easily obtained for various domains, in this work, we propose
jointly training on available spoken DST data and written tex-
tual data from other domains as a way to achieve cross-domain
generalization. We conduct experiments which show the ef-
ficacy of our proposed method for getting good cross-domain
DST performance without relying on spoken training data from
the target domains.
Index Terms: dialogue state tracking, task-oriented dialogue,
speech LLM, domain adaptation, joint speech-text training
1. Introduction
Task-oriented dialogue (ToD) systems are conversational agents
that assist users in achieving certain defined goals such as mak-
ing reservations, locating attractions, requesting information,
etc. As the dialogues typically comprise multiple user-agent
turns in unstructured natural language, a key component of
ToD systems is dialogue state tracking (DST)—the extraction
of structured domains and slots from the natural language con-
versation, e.g., from conversation turn:“It should leave after
13:45. ”and its context, it should extract the following domain
and slots:{train:{day: Sunday, departure: Cambridge, leave
at: 13:45}}.
That speech constitutes a natural and often more conve-
nient medium of communication has prompted research in DST
from spoken rather than text input [1]. This conventionally en-
tailed cascading an automatic speech recognition (ASR) mod-
ule, optional error correction modules, and text-based DST
modules [2, 3]. However, recent end-to-end (E2E) methods
have been developed which are trained to directly predict the
dialogue states from speech [4, 5, 6, 7].
E2E methods alleviate some of the deficiencies of their cas-
cade counterparts such as system complexity, error propagation,
latency, loss of paralinguistic information and other discrepan-
cies between spoken and written language. However, they suf-
fer from a data scarcity problem—collecting enough spoken di-
alogue data for training a well-performing spoken DST model
*These authors contributed equally.
from scratch is a laborious and expensive undertaking.
A recent E2E method [7]—which we take as a baseline in
this work—tackles the data scarcity problem by using a connec-
tor module to link a pretrained speech encoder and a pretrained
large language model (LLM) combining the former’s robust
speech modeling ability with the latter’s ability to extract com-
plex structured information from natural language. The con-
nector is then trained along with low-rank adapter (LoRA) [8]
layers to directly predict the dialogue states encoded as a JSON
string from the speech input into the encoder. While this ap-
proach proved successful, considerably outperforming previ-
ous state-of-the-art DST systems on the multi-domain Spoken-
WOZ [9], it struggles to generalize to domains (specifically, slot
values corresponding to names of places, restaurants, etc.) other
than those on which it was trained.
Given the cost and difficulty of collecting spoken DST
training data for every target domain, it is necessary to develop
methods that generalize to multiple domains without access to
spoken training data from those domains. We note thatun-
paired1 textual DST training data is more abundant and less
costly to collect. Moreover, prior work has shown that slot-
augmentation can significantly improve the performance and
robustness of text-based DST systems [10, 11]. Therefore, in-
spired by similar joint training methods that have been used for
other speech processing tasks [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], we pro-
pose a joint training method combining single-domain spoken
DST data with cross- or multi-domain textual data for training2.
In our method, we augment the LLM-based E2E speech-
to-DST model with a text encoder whose input is the natu-
ral language query from the user and whose output is passed
into the connector and then into the LLM to predict the dia-
logue states. By sharing parameters (specifically the connector
and the LoRA layers in the LLM) between the speech and text
pipelines and jointly training on spoken DST data from some
source domain(s) and textual DST data from target domains,
we aim to learn a multi-domain model capable of conducting
DST in the target domain.
We conduct experiments on the SpokenWOZ [9] and
Speech-Aware MultiWOZ [18] datasets, where we train on
speech data from asourcedomain jointly with text from
atargetdomain. These experiments show that the pro-
posed method consistently improves cross-domain generaliza-
tion across datasets and models, including scenarios where the
target text forms only a small portion of some larger text cor-
pora used for training. Furthermore, we compare this approach
1Note that by unpaired, here and throughout the paper, we mean
DST data with no spoken utterances as opposed to text data with no
DST labels.
2We released code and data athttps://github.com/
kackav/dialogue_state_tracking
5797
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2769
Figure 1:Joint speech and text E2E DST model.
to an alternative strategy that converts annotated user turns into
speech using a Text-To-Speech system (TTS), and demonstrate
that our proposed method achieves comparable results, without
the added complexity of TTS—an important advantage for low-
resource languages where high-quality TTS systems are often
unavailable.
1.1. Methods
Our DST system is based on the E2E framework from [7],
which uses a model comprising a speech encoder, a large lan-
guage model and a connector module used to transform the out-
puts of the former into the embedding space of the latter (il-
lustrated in Figure 1). The model’s inputs are the speech cor-
responding to the user input at the current turn of the dialogue
and the dialogue history in the form of transcriptions of user
and agent turns of the dialogue with a new-line character (\n)
inserted between turns. The speech is encoded by the tandem of
the encoder and the connector, and resulting speech embeddings
are prepended to the LM embeddings of the dialogue history.
The resulting sequence is passed through the LLM transformer
layers. The model is trained to output a single JSON string en-
coding a Python dictionary that contains the ASR transcription
and the dialogue states, i.e., the set of active domains and cor-
responding slots.
1.2. Joint Speech and Text E2E DST (Multimodal DST)
We propose modifying the E2E DST model to accommodate
training on not just spoken but also written task-oriented dia-
logues. To this end, we augment it with a text encoder which ac-
cepts as input the natural language user input of the current user
turn of the dialogue. As with the speech encoder output, the text
encoder output then goes through the connector, is prepended
to the dialogue history and then fed into the language model to
predict dialogue states.
The inclusion of the text encoder allows us to train on di-
verse text DST data without requiring paired spoken user utter-
ances. We hypothesize that this would allow us to improve the
model performance on spoken data from those domains, with-
out needing to synthetically generate them. Note that the text
encoder is only used to aid training and can be discarded during
inference, thus incurring no additional inference cost compared
to the baseline E2E DST system.
1.3. Training
Following the findings of [7], we train the model in two phases:
First, we freeze the LM and pretrain the encoder and connector
for ASR on diverse training data using the cross-entropy ob-
jective. Then, we introduce the text encoder and insert LoRA
layers into the LM, and finetune the connector, text encoder and
LoRA parameters jointly for DST from speech and text with the
speech encoder and base language model frozen.
At each step of training, we feed a speech batch and a text
batch through their respective encoders and train to minimize
a sum of three cross-entropy losses. In addition to the cross-
entropy objectives computed from the DST on speech data and
text DST on unpaired text data, we also train the model for text
DST from the transcription of the speech batch.
2. Experiments
2.1. Datasets and metrics
We conduct our experiments on two spoken dialogue state
tracking datasets: SpokenWOZ (SW) [9] and Speech-aware
MultiWOZ (MW) [18]. In most of our experiments, we uti-
lize a training set from one of them as the paired speech-text
data and the other as unpaired text data, e.g., training on a com-
bination of SpokenWOZ speech and MultiWOZ text and vice
versa, allowing us to measure the cross-domain performance.
We also use text from DialogStudio (DS) [19] as an alterna-
tive unpaired text to measure the impact of training on unpaired
DST data, which does not exactly match the target domain. For
SpokenWOZ, we follow the pre-processing from [7], discarding
nine corrupted conversations from the SpokenWOZ test sets,
and employing Whisper-large-v3 [20] to re-transcribe the user
and agent speech. We note that MultiWOZ presents an addi-
tional challenge because its validation and test sets contain data
from a different city (New York) than the training set (Cam-
bridge); therefore, we expect using MultiWOZ training text for
joint training would improve the slot keys but not necessarily
the values for the MultiWOZ.
For ASR training, we use the Fisher [21], Librispeech [22],
CommonV oice (version 17) [23] and V oxPopuli [24] datasets.
We report the joint goal accuracy (JGA) computed using
the MultiWOZ evaluation script 3 [25]. As is standard practice
in DST, before scoring, we post-process the outputs of all DST
systems using fuzzy matching 4 to match hypothesized slots to
the closest slots by edit distance in the ontology.
2.2. Model architecture and hyper-parameters
We use WavLM [26] as the pretrained speech encoder in all
our experiments, and Gemma-3-1B-it [27] as the LLM in most
experiments. We also report a subset of results with Gemma-3-
4B-it and Gemma-3-12B-it to quantify the impact of scaling, as
well as OLMo-1B [28] to facilitate comparison with prior state-
of-the-art [7] and because the openness of its training data and
configuration allay risks of data contamination.
For the connector, we use a 4-layer Transformer encoder
with hidden size 1024, 4 attention heads, feedforward interme-
diate dimensions of 4096 and sinusoidal positional encoding
with maximum length set to 512. The Transformer layers are
preceded by two convolutional layers with strides of 3 and 2, so
that the speech input to the LLM has 8 Hz. Note that text inputs
from the text encoder are passed through only the Transformer
and not the convolutional module of the connector.
For the text encoder, we use a Transformer encoder with
identical dimensions to the connector Transformer, preceded by
an input embedding layer with the same tokenizer as the respec-
3github.com/Tomiinek/MultiWOZ Evaluation
4pypi.org/project/fuzzywuzzy/
5798
Table 1:Joint goal accuracy (%) as unpaired text data is varied
on E2E model with Gemma-1B-it.
Training Training SW MW
Speech Text Val Val
A1
SW
✗36.1 15.1
A2 MW 36.3 19.0
A3 MW, DS 37.9 18.4
A4 DS 37.1 17.1
B1
MW
✗20.5 28.6
B2 SW 30.6 24.7
B3 SW, DS 28.8 23.6
B4 DS 20.5 28.1
C1 SW MW-train+test 38.7 23.1
C2 MW SW-train+test 32.6 25.7
C3 MW+SW✗36.2 16.9
C4 MW+SW MW-val, SW-val 55.3 42.4
tive LM. To compare the text encoder pipeline with training on
synthetic speech, we generated spoken user turns using Qwen3-
TTS-12Hz-0.6B-CustomV oice5 [29].
In the ASR training phase, we employ AdamW opti-
mizer [30] for 100k steps. The learning rate is warmed up over
the first 1000 steps up to a peak of2×10 −4 and then decayed
linearly to2×10 −6 over the course of training.
In the finetuning phase, we use LoRA with rank and alpha
32 and train using AdamW. We warm up the learning rate to a
peak of5×10 −5 over 1000 steps, and then decay it for up to
60k steps. We measure the JGA (in teacher-forcing mode) on
the validation sets and use it for early stopping and for selecting
the best checkpoint for each validation set.
3. Results
3.1. Training with text data from various sources
First, we explore the impact of training with text alongside
speech while varying the degree of relevance to the target test
sets, and we report these in Table 1.
Comparing rows A1 to A2, we find that training on paired
SpokenWOZ data with unpaired MultiWOZ training text con-
siderably improves performance on the MultiWOZ validation
set compared to the model trained with no text, reducing the
JGA gap to the model trained on paired MultiWOZ data by
28.9%. In the converse case, comparing B1 to B2, we observe
even larger improvements with a 64.7% reduction of the gap.
Next, we consider the case where the target text is mixed
with DialogStudio text (rows A3 and B3). This emulates a set-
ting where a large text corpus, including text from the target
domain, is available for training, but the target domain is not
necessarily known a priori. This slightly degrades the target
set performance compared to using only target training data as
the paired text, but is still considerably better than the baseline
trained with no unpaired text.
Subsequently, we train using only unpaired text from Di-
alogStudio without text from the target domain (rows A4 and
B4), and observe moderate improvement over the baseline on
the MultiWOZ validation set but none on SpokenWOZ. This
can be explained by the fact that the DialogStudio collection
contains the MultiWOZ training data but not SpokenWOZ.
5The voice was generated choosing the speaker “Ryan” from the
model’s speaker list
Overall, these results indicate that our proposed method en-
ables adaptation to a target domain using only unpaired text
from that domain, even when it forms only a small portion of a
larger text corpus.
Finally, we report results on a set of toplines. In C1 and C2,
we use as unpaired text the concatenation of the train and test
sets of the target domain (while still testing on the validation
set). We note that while C2 slightly outperforms B2 on Spoken-
WOZ (6.5%), C1 yields a more substantial relative improve-
ment of 21.6%. This latter result shows the impact of training
on text data with not just overlapping the domains but also the
slot values since the MultiWOZ test and validation sets con-
tain dialogues from the same city. In C3, we train on paired
data from both SpokenWOZ and MultiWOZ, and in C4, we
additionally use the text from thevalidationsets as unpaired
texts. C4 massively outperforms C3 even if the former is al-
ready trained on speech data from both domains. Although this
last experiment is only an oracle one, it underscores the capa-
bility of our method to adapt under idealized conditions.
3.2. Mechanism of incorporating unpaired text
While seeing the benefits of training on unpaired text, a natural
question arises as to whether and how much the text encoder ac-
tually contributes. Specifically, if the improvements are a result
of simply exposing the LM to dialogue states from the target
domain, we may simply finetune the LoRA parameters on the
unpaired data without a text encoder at all. To appropriately
contextualize these two results, we compare these results with
TTS-generated speech (Table 2).
Training without a text encoder (D1 and D3) performs
worse on the target domain than with it (A2 and B2, respec-
tively), but consistently improves upon the baseline with no un-
paired text (A1 and B1). This indicates that while part of our
improvements stem from simply exposing the LM to the target
domain dialogue states, another part of it comes from improv-
ing the speech pipeline’s ability to extract these dialogue states
from natural language input.
Using synthetic speech further recovers the JGA gap be-
tween training on the target domain speech and training on
target text data by 49% in the case of SpokenWOZ (D4) and
by 27% for MultiWOZ speech (D2), by slightly losing perfor-
mance on the original speech domain. Nonetheless, by appro-
priately tuning the weight of the text loss, we can trade in-
domain performance for target-domain gains and obtain simi-
lar results to those achieved with TTS. Specifically, setting the
weight of the text loss to 8, on the target domain task we achieve
32.4% JGA on SpokenWOZ and 21.8% on MultiWOZ. Joint
text training thereby constitutes a valid alternative when high
quality TTS systems are unavailable.
3.3. Test set performance
In addition to the Gemma-3-1B-it model used in all experi-
ments above, we also report results obtained with OLMo-1B,
Gemma-3-4B-it and Gemma-3-12B-it on the test sets in Table 3.
OLMo-1B lets us observe how well our method works on an
LM from a different family and to compare with [7] where most
results were from OLMo-1B. Experiments on Gemma-3-4B-it
and Gemma-3-12B-it show how well our approach translates to
larger and better language models. In these experiments, we
keep the same LoRA rank of 32.
On OLMo-1B, our implementation of the no-text baselines
outperforms the results reported in [7] (compare E0 and F0 to
E5 and F5, respectively). We credit this to using more data for
5799
Table 2:Joint goal accuracy (%) on Gemma-1B-it with or with-
out text encoder or with TTS-generated data.
Training Training TTS Text SW MW
Speech Text Speech Encoder Val Val
A1
SW
✗ ✗ ✗36.1 15.1
A2 MW ✗ ✓36.3 19.0
D1✗ ✗36.1 17.4
D2✗MW✗33.3 21.6
B1
MW
✗ ✗ ✗20.5 28.6
B2 SW ✗ ✓30.6 24.7
D3✗ ✗28.6 24.9
D4✗SW✗33.3 23.6
the ASR pretraining phase. Nevertheless, as in the Gemma-3-
1B-it experiments, joint training with target domain text leads
to a much improved target domain performance with Spoken-
WOZ, especially benefiting from target text training. Specifi-
cally, joint training with SpokenWOZ speech and MultiWOZ
text (E6) closes 46% of the MultiWOZ performance gap be-
tween the baseline trained on MultiWOZ speech with no text
(F5) and that trained on SpokenWOZ speech (E5). In the con-
verse experiment, where we train with MultiWOZ speech and
SpokenWOZ text (F6), we observe that we can recover 79% of
the performance gap on SpokenWOZ between training on Mul-
tiWOZ only (F5) and actual SpokenWOZ speech (E5).
Unsurprisingly, we find that larger LMs generally perform
better. More interestingly, the relative impact of joint text train-
ing is more pronounced the larger the LM is. In the case of the
largest model in our experiment, Gemma-3-12B-it, joint train-
ing with SpokenWOZ text and MultiWOZ speech (F4) yields
almost identical SpokenWOZ test set JGA as training on Spo-
kenWOZ speech (E3). Similarly, we observe larger relative im-
provements on MultiWOZ with the larger models. Moreover,
in the case of MultiWOZ, where adding SpokenWOZ text de-
grades the MultiWOZ test set JGA for Gemma-3-1B-it (B1 vs
B2), we observe that this performance degradation set decreases
(F3 vs F4) or disappears (F1 vs F2) for the larger models.
As audio-capable large language models are increasingly
being adopted for broader speech understanding tasks, we
present for comparison results obtained by prompting Gemini-
2.5-flash [31] to transcribe and predict dialog states. The JGA
values obtained (G1) are worse than the in-domain performance
of our Gemma-3-12B-it no-text baseline (E3 and F3), but better
than the results on out-of-domain validation sets. Nevertheless,
joint-text training produces significantly better in- and out-of-
domain results on SpokenWOZ and on MultiWOZ (E4 and F4),
while having remarkably lower inference latency. However, this
comparison should be treated cautiously due to limited trans-
parency in Gemini’s training data and prompt sensitivity.
3.4. Slot and values generation accuracy
Finally, we analyze the slot generation capabilities and how they
affect the JGA values. Since the first step of DST is the tran-
script generation, we evaluate the WERs on the turn transcrip-
tions (Table 4). When adding MultiWOZ text to SpokenWOZ
speech training (A2), the WER improves by 35% relative to the
no-text baseline. However, this does not result in a significant
improvement on the entity-level WER (E-WER) and on the slot
key F1 score, reflecting the difference in the text data, as the
MultiWOZ training set contains dialogues from a different city
Table 3:Test set joint goal accuracy (%) with various LLMs.
Training LLM Training SW MW
Speech Text Test Test
A1
SW
Gemma-3-1B-it ✗35.6 14.3
A2 MW 36.3 18.4
E1 Gemma-3-4B-it ✗41.0 16.9
E2 MW 40.3 22.6
E3 Gemma-3-12B-it ✗42.6 16.6
E4 MW 43.0 23.5
E0 [7]✗32.1 -
E5 OLMo-1B✗34.1 13.9
E6 MW 34.9 18.2
B1
MW
Gemma-3-1B-it ✗18.9 27.1
B2 SW 30.9 23.5
F1 Gemma-3-4B-it ✗19.8 27.3
F2 SW 37.4 30.8
F3 Gemma-3-12B-it ✗20.7 32.4
F4 SW 42.2 31.6
F0 [7]✗- 18.2
F5 OLMo-1B✗18.7 23.2
F6 SW 29.3 21.9
G1✗Gemini-2.5-flash✗26.5 20.8
Table 4:Word, Slot key F1, Entity Error Rates and WERs (%)
with Gemma-1B-it.
Training Training WER E-WER Slot-key-F1
Speech Text SW MW SW MW SW MW
Val Val Val Val Val Val
A1 SW ✗15.5 15.7 12.6 47.1 81.8 74.5
A2 MW 14.3 10.3 10.3 46.1 81.9 75.5
B1 MW ✗37.4 10.2 18.8 14.8 73.3 79.2
B2 SW 36.0 10.3 12.6 14.9 81.4 80.0
than the validation.
In fact, the higher JGA obtained by adding SpokenWOZ
text to MultiWOZ speech training (B1 vs B2) in Table 1 is
shown here to be caused by an improvement in slot keys recog-
nition and E-WER, while the overall ASR capabilities do not
improve significantly.
4. Conclusions
In this paper, we have proposed a joint speech and text train-
ing method for end-to-end spoken dialogue state tracking. Our
method entails augmenting an LLM-based spoken DST model
with a text encoder which allows the model to be trained on
arbitrary textual DST data. We show empirically on the Spo-
kenWOZ and MultiWOZ datasets that this method is able to
perform spoken DST on domains for which only textual train-
ing data is available, even in the presence of other irrelevant
training data. Furthermore, we show the stability of the model
across various language model choices, and similar improve-
ment trends even for stronger language models.
The approach we propose enables training multi-domain
spoken DST models with speech data from only a subset of
domains and only text data from the others. This work opens
the possibility of future work leveraging strategies known to
improve textual DST such as paraphrasing and slot augmenta-
tion [10, 11] which would otherwise be difficult to implement
directly on speech input.
5800
5. Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the project “On our own: Oppor-
tunities and Risks in the Individualization of Society (PRINS)
CZ.02.01.01/00/23 025/0008710”, which is co-financed by the
European Union, and by European Union’s Horizon Europe
project No. SEP-210943216 ”ELOQUENCE”. Computing
on IT4I supercomputer was supported by MoE through the e-
INFRA CZ (ID:90254).
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were not used for the writing of this paper.