ZeroSyl: Simple Zero-Resource Syllable Tokenization
for Spoken Language Modeling
Nicol Visser , Simon Malan, Danel Slabbert, Herman Kamper
Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Stellenbosch University, South Africa
{16986431, 24227013, 24051055, kamperh}@sun.ac.za
Abstract
Pure speech language models aim to learn language directly from
raw audio without textual resources. A key challenge is that
discrete tokens from self-supervised speech encoders result in
excessively long sequences, motivating recent work on syllable-
like units. However, methods like Sylber and SyllableLM rely
on intricate multi-stage training pipelines. We propose Zero-
Syl, a simple training-free method to extract syllable boundaries
and embeddings directly from a frozen WavLM model. Using
L2 norms of features in WavLM’s intermediate layers, ZeroSyl
achieves competitive syllable segmentation performance. The
resulting segments are mean-pooled, discretized using K-means,
and used to train a language model. ZeroSyl outperforms prior
syllabic tokenizers across lexical, syntactic, and narrative bench-
marks. Scaling experiments show that while finer-grained units
are beneficial for lexical tasks, our discovered syllabic units
exhibit better scaling behavior for syntactic modeling.
Index Terms: spoken language modeling, speech tokenization
1. Introduction
Advances in self-supervised learning (SSL) [1] have made it
possible to train language models directly on audio data: in-
stead of using tokenized text, a causal language model is trained
on tokens derived from an SSL model [2]. Without relying on
any textual resources, this framework would enable natural lan-
guage processing for languages lacking the massive speech-text
datasets required by traditional speech-driven technology. These
pure speech language models showed early potential [3], but
subsequent progress has slowed.
The decline in progress is most evident in syntactic model-
ing, where performance has plateaued since 2023. AudioLM [4]
remains the state-of-the-art, yet it relies on a resource-intensive
framework: a high-capacity language model trained on high-
bitrate tokens from w2v-BERT XL [5]. Moreover, recent work
indicates that pure speech modeling scales less favorably than
text [6], suggesting that simply increasing model size and data
volume will not solve the problem. This has resulted in a shift
toward discovering more effective speech units in order to close
the performance gap with textual models of comparable size [7].
One hypothesis is that the fine granularity of standard speech
tokens creates a bottleneck [8]. Because discrete speech tokens
are extracted at a much higher rate than text tokens, the re-
sulting sequences are substantially longer, making it difficult
to model long-range dependencies. To mitigate this, studies
have attempted to utilize larger phone-, syllable-, or word-like
units [8–11]. Syllable-based modeling has proven to be particu-
larly successful [10, 11]. However, existing syllabic tokenizers
rely on complex multi-stage pipelines where an SSL model must
be fine-tuned with a specialized objective.
WavLM up to L13
WavLM L14-L22
 
Detect boundaries
L2 norm
Detect peaks
Mean pool
K-means
Figure 1:ZeroSyl detects syllabic boundaries using prominence-
based peak detection on features from layer 13 of a frozen
WavLM. It then mean pools semantic features from layer 22
within the discovered boundaries and clusters these using spher-
icalK-means. A language model is trained on these cluster IDs.
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised approach to syl-
lable tokenization that does not require the complex methods
of previous work. Figure 1 shows our simple pipeline. We find
that high-quality syllabic boundaries can be extracted by simply
applying peak detection to the L2 norms of frozen WavLM [12]
features. We then mean-pool and cluster features within these
boundaries to generate a discrete vocabulary. A symbolic lan-
guage model [13] is trained on the resulting sequences. This ap-
proach, which we call ZeroSyl, surpasses the syntactic (sBLIMP)
performance of comparable syllabic models and achieves su-
perior performance on the Topic StoryCloze (tSC) narrative
benchmark. It also outperforms syllabic systems on the lexi-
cal sWUGGY benchmark. But in scaling experiments, it does
not surpass the performance of a system utilizing fine-grained
units [7]. Nevertheless, our results demonstrate that high-quality
syllable discovery is possible without complex multi-stage train-
ing pipelines, paving a simple and effective path for future re-
search in spoken language modeling. Models and code available
at:https://github.com/nicolvisser/ZeroSyl/
2. Related work
This work focuses onpurespeech language models, where text
is not used or incorporated at all [14]. Standard benchmarks
have been developed that assess how well these models capture
lexical, syntactic, and semantic properties [15, 16].
4062
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-315
To date, AudioLM [4] achieves state-of-the-art performance
in syntactic modeling. However, since it uses a 25 Hz-tokenizer
that produces long sequences, a large language model (300M
parameters) is subsequently required to capture long-range de-
pendencies. SpidR [7] is a recent SSL-based approach that is
more lightweight. It uses online clustering and a novel train-
ing objective to improve the SSL representations and resulting
speech units. While SpidR achieves the best lexical model-
ing scores, its units remain close to the frame level. As with
AudioLM, the sequence lengths are therefore very long, and
SpidR has not surpassed AudioLM’s syntactic scores.
Instead of directly discretizing SSL features, two noteworthy
approaches have turned to syllable units to deal with the long se-
quence lengths. Sylber [10] utilizes a sentence-level distillation
bjective [17] to finetune HuBERT [18]. After distillation, syl-
lable boundaries are accessible using cosine similarity between
the framewise features. SyllableLM [11] identifies boundaries
by analyzing the HuBERT loss objective. The idea is that fully
masking a syllable results in a distinct disruption of the loss
compared to partial masking. Syllable boundaries are predicted
by monitoring the loss as a masked interval sweeps across the ut-
terance. To reduce computational load at inference time, both ap-
proaches distill the boundary information: they train an encoder
to predict piecewise-constant targets, derived by mean-pooling
the teacher model’s embeddings over the discovered segments.
Both approaches therefore require multiple training stages with
specially designed architectures and objectives.
The syllabic methodology shows clear promise for spoken
language modeling, but we want to see if a simpler approach is
possible. For this, we build on a simple approach for unsuper-
visedworddiscovery [19]: prominent peaks in a dissimilarity
curve (typically cosine distance) between adjacent features [20]
from a frozen SSL model are taken to indicate word boundaries.
So far, this approach has been optimized for lexical units [19,21]
and underperforms when used directly to find syllabic units [22].
3. Models and methodology
Our work builds on prominence-based segmentation [19]. How-
ever, where previous work used the cosine similarity between
adjacent frames to find word boundaries, we find that the L2
norm of the hidden representations themselves provides a signal
corresponding to syllabic structure. In contrast to Sylber [10]
and SyllableLM [11], our method is much simpler and does not
require further training of the SSL encoder.
3.1. Boundary detection
For a given speech utterance, we extract framewise embeddings
H [13]
1:T = [h [13]
1 ,h [13]
2 ,...,h [13]
T ] from layer 13 of WavLM
Large [12]. We compute the L2 norm for each frame, nt =
∥h[13]
t ∥2 , and apply a 3-point moving average filter to reduce
high-frequency noise. We then apply prominence-based peak
detection on the smoothed signal: a peak is identified as a bound-
ary if it has a prominence of at leastδ= 0.45σ , whereσ is the
standard deviation of the signaln t.
Example predictions are shown in Figure 2. R-value and
token-F1 scores on development data (described later) are best
using layer 13, a filter length of 3, and a prominence of0.45σ.
3.2. Tokenization
Once the boundaries [b1,b 2,...,b N ] are established, we extract
semantic features from layer 22 of WavLM Large and apply
they began their
performances
DH-EY
B-IH
G-AE-N
DH-EH-R
P-ER
F-AO-R
M-AH-N
S-IH-Z
norms smoothed norms peaks
Figure 2:Peak detection on the smoothed L2 norms of framewise
features gives our predicted syllable boundaries. The dashed
lines indicate the ground truth syllables.
mean-pooling within each segment:
ej =MeanPool(H [22]
bj :bj+1 )(1)
We select this layer because higher WavLM layers are known to
capture richer semantic information than those used for boundary
detection [23]. Empirically, we find that layer 22 yields the
highest mutual information with syllable labels after clustering.
The resulting embeddingsej are clustered using spherical
K-means withK-means++ initialization. TheK-means model
is trained until convergence on 100 hours of LibriSpeech [24]
using the faiss library [25]. We set the vocabulary size to
K=10 000 following Sylber [10], which reports this as the
optimal size for syntactic modeling.
After clustering, multiple centroids correspond to silences.
We find that language modeling performance improves when
these entries are collapsed to a single vocabulary item (see Ta-
ble 2 below). We do this in an unsupervised manner by per-
forming hierarchical clustering on the centroids. From informal
inspection, we know that the two main branches in agglomerative
hierarchical clustering correspond to silences and non-silences,
respectively. We pick the smaller branch, which represents si-
lences, and map these items to one vocabulary item. This reduces
the vocabulary size from 10 000 to 9 116.
3.3. Language modeling
We train a causal language model on the discovered syllabic
units. Following prior work [7, 11], we use the OPT-125M
architecture [13] with a batch size of 81 920 tokens, and a context
length of 2 048. The learning rate increases linearly from 0 to
2·10 −4 for the first 8% of steps followed by a cosine annealing
schedule. For our comparative experiments in Section 4, we train
the ZeroSyl language model on a single GPU on 6k hours of
Libri-Light [26] for 25k steps. For our final scaled experiments
in Section 5, we train on the full 60k hours for 200k steps.
3.4. Implementation of previous systems
For our comparisons against Sylber [10] and SyllableLM [11],
we strictly follow the code implementations released by the au-
thors. Since Sylber did not release a clustering model, we train
a sphericalK-means model withK= 10 000 on their embed-
dings. As per their specifications [10], we include an explicit
silence token when more than seven frames correspond to silence.
For SyllableLM, we utilize the official extraction pipeline, in-
cluding agglomerative clustering and deduplication. SyllableLM
has multiple variants. To ensure the strongest possible baseline,
we consider all configurations (5.0, 6.25, and 8.33 Hz) and report
the best result. We train OPT-125M [13] language models on top
4063
Table 1:Boundary detection performance on the combined test
sets of LibriSpeech. A boundary tolerance of 50 ms is allowed.
Pr: precision, Re: recall, R: R-value, OS: over segmentation.
Boundary Token
Pr Re F1 OS R Pr Re F1
SyllableLM 5.0 Hz 7179751077 545856
SyllableLM 6.25 Hz 62 87 72 41 59 445950
SyllableLM 8.33 Hz 509165 81 27 31 52 39
Sylber 65 74 69 13 71 48 54 51
PromSeg 62 65 64469 40 41 41
ZeroSyl 69 75 72 10 75 52 56 54
of the resulting units, following the same setup as for ZeroSyl
above, except for SyllableLM, which is trained on two GPUs for
50% more steps to account for the higher token rate. For scaled
comparison to SpidR [7], we use results directly from the paper.
4. Experiments: Syllabic system comparison
We perform a range of experiments to benchmark ZeroSyl’s
units. In this section, we focus on systems that operate at the
syllable level; comparisons against other systems are reserved for
Section 5. We therefore compare ZeroSyl against Sylber [10] and
SyllableLM [11] when trained on 6k hours of Libri-Light. This
is a reasonable training set size enabling reliable comparisons
without extensive training time. Before describing language
modeling results, we first perform intrinsic evaluations of the
predicted syllable boundaries and discovered syllabic clusters.
4.1. Boundary and token detection
Setup:We start by evaluating how closely the predicted bound-
aries match true syllables. Ground truth syllable boundaries
are obtained using phone-level forced alignments [27] with a
rule-based method [28] that converts phone sequences to sylla-
bles. In addition to precision, recall, and F1, boundaries are also
evaluated using R-value and token scores. R-value measures
how close predicted syllable boundaries are to an ideal operating
point with 100% recall and 0% over-segmentation [29]; over-
segmentation is the ratio of the number of predicted boundaries
relative to the number of ground-truth boundaries [30]. Token
boundary scores (precision, recall, and F1) require both the start
and end boundaries to be correct. For all metrics, we allow
a boundary tolerance of 50 ms on either side of a true bound-
ary [10, 11]. Boundaries that border silences are not evaluated.
As in [10], we allow for a constant time shift in the predicted
boundaries to account for potential latency in the representations;
these shifts are tuned for each system on development data.
Results:Table 1 presents the boundary prediction results
on the combined test sets of LibriSpeech. Overall, the 5.0 Hz
version of SyllableLM performs best on several of the metrics.
However, ZeroSyl performs competitively despite not requiring
any model training, achieving very similar token F1 scores (54%
vs. 56%). With an R-value of 75% and a token F1-score of 54%,
ZeroSyl also outperforms Sylber (71% and 51%, respectively).
ZeroSyl maintains a low over-segmentation rate of 10%, sub-
stantially lower than the higher-frequency SyllableLM variants.
This indicates that our method avoids fragmenting syllables into
smaller acoustic events. We also include a prominence-based
baseline (PromSeg) that uses the same layer, window size, and
prominence as ZeroSyl, but with peak detection on the cosine
distance between adjacent frames [19]. ZeroSyl outperforms this
baseline on all metrics except over-segmentation. This shows
that the L2 norm provides a better signal for syllable boundaries.
4.2. Syllable discovery
Setup:To evaluate the quality of the discovered syllabic units,
we assess how well the clusters map to true syllable labels. As
in [10], we map predicted segments to ground-truth syllables
with the most overlap. High-quality clusters should exhibit high
per-cluster purity, where each cluster ID maps mostly to one
syllable label, as well as high inverse purity, where each syllable
is found mostly in one cluster. Syllable-normalized mutual in-
formation (SNMI) measures the percentage of uncertainty about
the syllable label eliminated after observing the cluster ID [18].
While smaller vocabularies are often used to evaluate syllabic
clusters [10, 11, 17], we evaluate the systems using the actual
vocabulary sizes employed in the downstream language model
(8k–10k). We compare system efficiency in terms of bitrate
(using the entropic formulation [2]) and token frequency. Evalu-
ations are done on the LibriSpeech test set.
Results:Table 2 shows syllable discovery results in its mid-
dle columns. By default, ZeroSyl collapses silences (Section 3.2),
but here we also report scores without collapsing. ZeroSyl out-
performs all other systems on all purity and mutual-information
metrics, while maintaining the lowest bitrate (52 bps). Specifi-
cally, ZeroSyl achieves an SNMI of 88.9%, higher than Sylber
(83.5%) and SyllableLM (82.6%). The rich semantic information
in the later layers of WavLM Large likely boosts the quality of the
representations compared to the base versions of data2vec [31]
and SD-HuBERT [17] that are used as backbones in SyllableLM
and Sylber, respectively. Comparing the uncollapsed and col-
lapsed versions of ZeroSyl shows that merging redundant silence
tokens drastically improves inverse purity (from 20.0% to 32.0%)
while maintaining high per-cluster purity and SNMI.
4.3. Spoken language modeling
Our main question is whether syllabic units from the simple
ZeroSyl approach (Sections 3.1 and 3.2) are useful for spoken
language modeling. We train language models on the syllabic
units of ZeroSyl (Section 3.3) and the other systems (Section 3.4),
and probe the models’ lexical, syntactic, and narrative capabili-
Table 2:Syllable discovery and language modeling performance. Syllable discovery metrics are reported on the combined LibriSpeech
test set. Language models are trained on 6k hours of Libri-Light and evaluated on the sLM21 development set.
Syllable discovery (%) Language modeling (%)
V ocab.
size
Bitrate
(bps)
Freq.
(Hz)
Purity Inverse
purity
SNMI sWUGGY
(all)
sWUGGY
(IV)
sBLIMP tSC
SyllableLM 6.25Hz 8k 73 5.87 67.5 23.2 82.6 66.1 74.2 56.4 67.6
Sylber 10k 53 4.46 73.5 28.4 83.5 66.0 74.7 59.1 65.8
ZeroSyl (uncollapsed sil.) 10k 58 4.5580.520.089.567.0 76.3 58.6 67.5
ZeroSyl 9k52 4.3579.932.088.968.0 78.6 60.5 68.1
4064
ties. All the benchmarks below rely on likelihood estimates from
the language model, for which we use the mean log-likelihood
per token to account for varying sequence lengths.
Lexical task (sWUGGY):This task tests whether a model
can distinguish real lexical items from phonologically plausi-
ble fakes. The model processes pairs containing one actual
word, such as “manufacturer,” and one matched non-word, like
“manifelturer,” and must assign a higher likelihood to the real
word. We report metrics forallpairs in the SLM21 development
set [15], and forin-vocabulary (IV)pairs, where the real word is
guaranteed to appear in the LibriSpeech vocabulary.
Results:Table 2 shows that ZeroSyl outperforms all the
other systems on the sWUGGY benchmark: it achieves the
highest accuracy on both the general (68.0%) and in-vocabulary
(78.6%) subsets. The silence collapsing step in ZeroSyl also
yields a clear improvement over the uncollapsed version.
Syntactic task (sBLIMP):This benchmark evaluates a
model’s grasp of sentence structure [15]. Each test item consists
of two spoken sentences: one is grammatically correct, while the
other contains a single syntax error. For example, the model com-
pares “Whatdentistis Angela working with?” against “What
is Angela working withdentist?” and must identify the valid
sentence by assigning it a higher likelihood.
Results:Table 2 shows that ZeroSyl achieves an sBLIMP
score of 60.5%, higher than both SyllableLM (56.4%) and Sylber
(59.1%).1 Again, the collapsed version of ZeroSyl improves
upon the one where silences are not collapsed.
Narrative task:The Topic StoryCloze (tSC) benchmark
evaluates long-range language modeling performance by measur-
ing narrative coherence [16]. The model receives a four-sentence
spoken prompt and must identify the original fifth sentence from
a negative sample randomly selected from a different story. This
task tests whether the model can pick a logically consistent
continuation in a spoken context.
Results:As shown in Table 2, ZeroSyl achieves 68.0%
accuracy on the tSC task, outperforming all other systems.
Overall, ZeroSyl outperforms other syllabic units systems
across the lexical, syntactic, and narrative benchmarks. Given
that ZeroSyl also has the lowest bitrate, these results show that
the discovered units provide a more efficient representation for
spoken language modeling than previous work.
5. Experiments: Scaling behavior
Finally, we investigate the performance of ZeroSyl as training
data scales from 600 to 6k to 60k hours of Libri-Light. Here
we compare mainly to SpidR [7], because it represents a well-
performing non-syllabic approach which is still simple (like
ZeroSyl): SpidR uses K-means to discretize features from a
proposed SSL model. However, unlike ZeroSyl, this system
produces tokens close to the frame-level,2 resulting in a much
higher bitrate than ZeroSyl. We also include the text topline
from [7] that uses byte-pair encoding (BPE) on characters. Zero-
Syl, SpidR, and the topline all use the same language model [13].
Results:sWUGGY , sBLIMP, and tSC results are given in
Figure 3. In the sWUGGY task (Figure 3 top-left), ZeroSyl trails
the fine-grained SpidR. This reflects a trade-off: while SpidR
units preserve the frame-level phonetic detail required in the
1We report all scores using mean per-token log-likelihoods, since
this gave better sWUGGY and tSC scores for all systems, and since this
is what is reported in [4, 7]. However, when using unnormalized log-
likelihoods, sBLIMP scores improve to 62.4%, 60.8%, 63.0%, and 63.8%
for SyllableLM, Sylber, Zerosyl-uncollapsed, and ZeroSyl, respectively.
2WithK= 256, the token rate is 26 Hz and the bitrate is 205 bps.
AudioLM
SyllableLM
300M parameters:
100M parameters:
Figure 3:Scaling behavior of ZeroSyl compared to speech (SpidR
withK-means) and text (BPE) systems on the Libri-Light corpus.
lexical task, ZeroSyl compresses this information into syllabic
units, sacrificing acoustic granularity. However, this trade-off
proves advantageous at the syntactic level: in the sBLIMP evalu-
ation (Figure 3 top-right), the performance of SpidR saturates as
data scales, whereas ZeroSyl maintains a steep upward trajectory,
outperforming SpidR at 6k and 60k hours. On the tSC narrative
task (Figure 3 bottom-left), ZeroSyl effectively matches SpidR
at the 60k-hour mark, with a steeper upward trend.
Throughout this paper, we used the same 100M-parameter
language model architecture [13] to allow for meaningful com-
parisons, and did not consider the considerably larger sizes also
occasionally used [4, 11]. But we see in Figure 3 that the per-
formance gains of the 300M-parameter AudioLM [4] and Syl-
lableLM [11] systems are marginal considering the significant
increase in computational cost. Interestingly, even with these
bigger models, a single system does not perform best on all
three tasks.3 Returning to our main question of whether a simple
syllable-based approach is possible, it is clear that even com-
pared to these much larger models, ZeroSyl provides competitive
performance without intricate training procedures.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we introduced ZeroSyl, a training-free framework
for discovering syllabic units directly from unlabelled speech.
By leveraging feature norms from a frozen SSL model (WavLM
Large), ZeroSyl eliminates the complex multi-stage methods
required by prior state-of-the-art syllabic tokenizers.
ZeroSyl outperforms existing syllabic tokenizers across lex-
ical, syntactic, and narrative benchmarks when trained on 6k
hours of speech. Scaling experiments reveal that while finer-
grained units retain an advantage for lexical tasks, ZeroSyl’s
syllabic units are more effective for modeling long-range de-
pendencies, showing a steep upward trajectory in syntactic per-
formance as data increases. Ultimately, ZeroSyl demonstrates
that high-quality spoken language modeling does not necessar-
ily require increasingly complex tokenizers, but rather a deeper
understanding of the signals already present in SSL features.
Future work should investigate why and how the L2 norm
signal of SSL representations provides implicit positional encod-
ings of syllables. While ZeroSyl’s low rate encoding benefits
syntactic and narrative modeling, the resulting syllabic units
might be detrimental for encoding lexical items, especially if
they are rare or unseen. This should be investigated.
3AudioLM did not evaluate the tSC bench