Towards Interpretable Framework for Neural Audio Codecs via Sparse
Autoencoders: A Case Study on Accent Information
Shih-Heng Wang1, Tiantian Feng1, Aditya Kommineni1, Thanathai Lertpetchpun1, Bowen Yi1, Xuan
Shi1, Shrikanth Narayanan1
1 University of Southern California, USA
shihheng@usc.edu
Abstract
Neural Audio Codecs (NACs) are widely adopted in modern
speech systems, yet how they encode linguistic and paralinguis-
tic information remains unclear. Improving the interpretability
of NAC representations is critical for understanding and deploy-
ing them in sensitive applications. Hence, we employ Sparse
Autoencoders (SAEs) to decompose dense NAC representations
into sparse, interpretable activations. In this work, we focus
on a challenging paralinguistic attribute—accent—and propose
a framework to quantify NAC task-level interpretability. We
evaluate 4 four NAC models under 16 SAE configurations us-
ing a relative performance index. Our results show that DAC
and SpeechTokenizer achieve the highest interpretability. We
further reveal that acoustic-oriented NACs encode accent infor-
mation primarily in activation magnitudes of sparse representa-
tions, whereas phonetic-oriented NACs rely more on activation
positions, and that low-bitrate EnCodec variants show higher
interpretability.
Index Terms: Interpretability, Sparse Autoencoders, Neural
Audio Codec, Accent
1. Introduction
Neural Audio Codec (NAC) representations [1–13] have been
widely adopted in modern speech processing systems, such
as text-to-speech and speech foundation models, serving as
compact discrete representations of speech [9, 14–18]. This
widespread usage has resulted in efforts towards benchmark-
ing NAC representations on both speech understanding and
generation tasks [10–13]. Additionally, preliminary works
have investigated the robustness [19] and generalization abil-
ity [20] of NAC representations. While these works provide
us with understanding of NACs’ performance on varied speech
tasks, the internal mechanisms of NACs—namely, how the
learnt representations encode linguistic and paralinguistic in-
formation—remain underexplored. Limited understanding of
NAC internal mechanisms constrains the development of inter-
pretable models for deployment in sensitive domains. In areas
such as healthcare and assistive technologies, interpretability is
critical for trustworthy decision-making.
To address this gap, we propose employing Sparse Au-
toencoders (SAEs) [21] to improve the interpretability of NAC
representations. Recent works in Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP) have used SAEs to extract human-interpretable fea-
tures from language models’ representations [21–26]. SAEs
decompose polysemantic representations into sparse, high-
dimensional activations where each dimension corresponds to
an monosemantic feature. In speech and audio domains, SAEs
have been used to analyze ASR models [27–30], foundation
models for speech and music [31–33], revealing task-relevant
and acoustically meaningful features. Another recent study [34]
shows that SAEs trained on latent representations of audio gen-
erative models can isolate interpretable acoustic properties such
as pitch, amplitude and timbre.
As a first step towards interpreting NAC representations,
we focus onaccentinformation. Accent provides a challeng-
ing case for interpretability: it arises from interactions among
speaker characteristics, phonetic realization, and contextual
variation across utterances [35]. After compressed by NACs,
these factors are further entangled within discrete codes, mak-
ing interpreting how accent information is encoded difficult. By
examining accent as an initial case study, we aim to establish a
measurable framework for NAC interpretability, which can be
extended to other speaker traits and paralinguistic attributes.
To achieve this goal, we develop a framework to measure
NAC interpretability in accent information. Specifically, we
focus on task-level interpretability in this work. We first ex-
tract NAC representations (Sec. 2.1) and train SAEs to obtain
interpretable sparse activations (Sec. 2.2). Logistic regression
(LR) classifiers are trained on these activations to perform ac-
cent classification (Sec. 2.3). To further analyze how accent
information is encoded, we propose to decompose the activa-
tions into two complementary components—positionandmag-
nitude—for analysis (Sec. 2.3). Last, for fair comparison, we
propose to measure interpretability using the relative perfor-
mance index∆F1 (Sec. 2.4), defined with respect to each NAC
reference performance.
In our experiments, we build two binary English accent
classification tasks (Sec. 3.1) with data described in the V ox-
Profile benchmark [36]. We train SAE models with four NAC
models—EnCodec [2], DAC [3], Mimi [9], and SpeechTok-
enizer [4](Sec. 3.2). Each NAC is tested under 16 SAE con-
figurations of varying latent size and sparsity (Sec. 3.3). Our
contributions and results are summarized as follows:
1. We propose a framework for NAC task-level interpretability
by learning SAE sparse representations and measuring their
effectiveness through relative performance index,∆F1.
2. DAC and SpeechTokenizer show the best accent-based inter-
pretability among the four NACs.
3. We observe different behaviors among NACs: acoustic-
oriented NACs encode accent information primarily in
activation magnitudes of sparse representations, whereas
phonetic-oriented NACs rely more on activation positions.
2. Framework
In this section, we will introduce our proposed framework and
how we utilize it to measure the interpretability level of NACs.
In Figure 1, we give an overview of our framework.
6009
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-811
Hello, how are you?
Speech Content
Speaker Accent
Speaker Sex
NAC 
Decoder
NAC 
Encoder
Quantizer
A
u û 
1.5
0
0
4.5
0
0
Wenc Wdec
1 0 0 1 0 0 4.5 1.5
L = ||u - û||2
2
SAE Training
B C
u LRu
Speaker 
Accent
z LRz
LR: Logistic Regression
Figure 1:Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) framework for measuring interpretability of NACs. (A) Extraction of utterance level representation
for a given speech input using NAC. (B) SAE training for learning sparse representationz. Position (z pos) and Magnitude (z mag) are
then derived from sparse representation. (C) Logistic regression models are trained for binary accent classification tasks, with the
utterance level representation (u) providing reference score F1ref and sparse representation corresponding to F1dz ,k
2.1. Neural audio codec representations
Neural Audio Codecs (NACs) [1–9] typically consist of three
components during inference: an encoder, vector quantiz-
ers [37], and a decoder. Given a waveform, the encoder converts
it into the continuous representatione. Next, the vector quan-
tizers quantizeeinto discrete codesc, which can be used as
speech representations for language modeling and other down-
stream tasks [14–16]. Last, discrete codescare mapped back to
a continuous representation ˆe∈R T×d codec, whereTrepresents
time, and the decoder reconstructs the waveform with ˆe.
In Figure 1A, we illustrate how NAC representations are
incorporated into our framework. We apply mean pooling
over time on ˆeto obtain an utterance-level representationu∈
Rdcodec, as accent information distributes across the entire utter-
ance. We analyze and train the SAE on the representationu.
2.2. Sparse autoencoder
A Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) is used to decompose accent in-
formation from the utterance-level representationsuas shown
in Figure 1B. While there are several SAE variants [21, 24, 38],
in this study we adopt TopK SAE, used in prior speech SAE
literature [31]. This variant controls sparsity by retaining only
theklargest non-zero activations. Specifically, the SAE model
consists of a linear encoder and a linear decoder with weights
Wenc andW dec, respectively, without bias terms in either layer.
During training,uis first shifted by a bias termb pre and then
projected into a higher-dimensional latent space. A top-kacti-
vation is applied to enforce sparsity in the latent representation:
z=TopK(W enc(u−b pre),k),z∈R dz (1)
whered z > dcodec. Next, the decoder reconstructs the input
representation from the sparse activationz, i.e., ˆu=W decz+
bpre. Finally, we update the model with the reconstruction loss
using mean squared error (MSE), defined asL=∥u− ˆu∥2
2.
Additional implementation details can be found in [24].
Within our framework, we use the learned sparse represen-
tationzfor accent classification. This design is motivated by
two considerations. First,zpreserves information to reconstruct
u, ensuring that task-relevant information is retained. Second,
zis sparser and more interpretable than the original representa-
tionu, allowing us to probe not only whether accent informa-
tion is present, but how it is organized within the representation.
2.3. Information encoding and logistic regression
To analyze howzencodes accent information, as shown in Fig-
ure 1B, we decomposezinto two complementary components:
positionandmagnitudefeatures, denoted asz pos andz mag.
Position featurez pos∈R dz preserves the indices of activated
dimensions. Specifically, inz pos, only activated positions are
assigned a value of 1, and all other positions are set to 0.
Table 1:Reference macro-F1 score (%) of each NAC in US vs.
UK and US vs. Non-US-UK settings. Higher value is better.
EnCodec
1.5/6/12 kbps DAC Mimi
Speech
Tokenizer
US vs. UK81.11 / 80.20 / 80.17 79.74 88.7992.44
US vs.
Non-US-UK 57.19 / 60.93 / 61.98 61.33 75.7075.98
Magnitude featurez mag ∈R k, in contrast, retains only the
activation magnitudes of the top-kactive dimensions, sorted in
descending order, while discarding their positional indices. In
this representation, only the activation strengths are preserved,
and all positional information is removed.
We train logistic regression (LR) classifiers on sparse rep-
resentationzto predict the binary accent label. Additionally,
we train separate LR classifiers onz pos, andz mag to evaluate the
contribution of positional and magnitude information indepen-
dently towards accent classification.
2.4. Interpretability measurement
We evaluate the accent classification F1 score and use it as a
task-level proxy for interpretability. However, the represen-
tationuderived from each NAC inherently encodes different
amounts of accent-related information. Therefore, a higher F1
score does not imply higher interpretability. To enable fair com-
parison, in Table 1, we establish reference F1 scores for each
NAC modelCby training an LR classifier directly onu. For
each SAE configuration(d z,k), we compute the∆F1 as:
∆F1C
dz,k =F1C
dz,k−F1C
ref,(2)
A higher (i.e., less negative)∆F1 indicates that accent in-
formation remains largely preserved in the sparse representa-
tionz, suggesting higher interpretability. Conversely, a larger
performance drop implies that accent information is distributed
across many dimensions and cannot be easily decomposed into
sparse representations, indicating lower interpretability.
We use∆F1 computed on the full sparse activationzas the
overall interpretability index for each NAC. In addition,∆F1
computed on the position-only featureszpos and magnitude-only
featuresz mag provide a more fine-grained analysis. It quantifies
how much accent information is attributable to activation posi-
tion and magnitude, respectively.
3. Experimental setup
3.1. Dataset
Vox-Profile.For both SAE and LR training (Sec. 2.2 and
Sec. 2.3), we use the accent classification dataset described
in the V ox-Profile benchmark [36]. V ox-Profile aggregates 11
open-source datasets with self-reported English accents and
covers more than 16 English accents across different regions.
6010
Figure 2:Interpretability measured by∆F1 (%) under the US vs. UK setting. Each subplot corresponds to a different latent ratioq.
The x-axis denotes sparsity levels, and higher∆F1 indicates better interpretability.
Figure 3:Interpretability measured by∆F1 (%) under the US vs. Non-US-UK setting. Each subplot corresponds to a different latent
ratioq. The x-axis denotes sparsity levels, and higher∆F1 indicates better interpretability.
Task formulation and data split.We design two binary accent
classification settings:US vs. UKandUS vs. Non-US-UK.
In both settings, samples labeled asNorth Americaare
grouped as US accent (label = 0). For the US vs. UK setting,
samples labeled asBritish Islesin [36], excluding Irish, are
grouped as UK accent (label = 1). For the US vs. Non-US-UK
setting, samples labeled as regions outsideNorth Americaand
theBritish Isles(see Table 2 in [36]) are grouped as Non-US-
UK (label = 1). We conduct experiments on both settings to
ensure our findings generalize across accent distinctions.
We adopt the predefined speaker-disjoint train, validation,
and test splits from V ox-Profile. In test sets, US accent sam-
ples account for 69.90% and 63.98% of samples in the US vs.
UK and US vs. Non-US-UK settings, respectively. To avoid
data leakage between SAE and LR training, we divide the orig-
inal validation set evenly into two non-overlapping subsets. The
first half is used to monitor loss convergence in SAE (Sec. 2.2),
while the other half is used to train the LR classifier.
Audio preprocessing.For each audio sample, we crop the first
30 seconds, resample it to the sampling rate of the correspond-
ing NAC, and convert it to the mono-channel format.
3.2. Neural audio codecs
NAC selection.We include four widely used NAC models: En-
Codec [2], DAC [3], SpeechTokenizer [4], and Mimi [9] in our
experiments. EnCodec and DAC are considered to yield rep-
resentations that characterize acoustic properties. In contrast,
SpeechTokenizer and Mimi capture stronger “phonetic” struc-
ture [39], as they distill representations from HuBERT [40] and
WavLM [41] during pre-training. While accent is partially re-
flected by acoustic properties like prosody and intonation, it is
more closely related to phonetic characteristics [35]. Therefore,
we hypothesize different accent information encoding behav-
iors between these two categories of NACs.
NAC model configurations.EnCodec (24 kHz, 1.5/6/12 kbps,
dcodec = 128); DAC (24 kHz,d codec = 1024); SpeechTokenizer
(16 kHz,d codec = 1024); Mimi (24 kHz,d codec = 512).
3.3. Training & hyperparameters
SAE: For SAE training, we adopt the official OpenAI TopK
SAE implementation [24]. As the representation dimension
dcodec varies across different NACs, using a fixed latent dimen-
siond z and sparsity levelkwould lead to an unfair comparison.
To ensure consistency across codecs, we scaled z proportion-
ally tod codec withlatent ratioq= dz
dcodec
∈ {2,5,10,20}.
Value ofkis determined by arelative sparsityparameter
s∈ {0.5,0.25,0.10,0.05}wherek=⌈s·d codec⌉, resulting
in 16 total configurations. The relative sparsity parameter en-
sures each NAC representation retains the same proportion of
active dimensions, avoiding bias from a fixedkthat could favor
codecs with larger or smallerd codec.
We train SAE models with batch size=1024 for 200 epochs.
For configurations withq∈{2,5}ands∈{0.10,0.05}, we
extend training to 500 epochs due to slower convergence. Adam
optimizer with a learning rate of1e−5andϵ= 6.25e−10is
used. The source code is available at here.
Logistic regression: For LR, we normalized input features and
adoptedSagasolver with L1 penalty andmax iter=3000.
Macro-F1 score is reported to account for class imbalance.
4. Result & Analysis
4.1. NAC overall interpretability
Figures 2 and 3 show the∆F1 (Eq. 2) under the US vs. UK and
US vs. Non-US-UK settings, respectively.
US vs. UK.Across nearly all configurations, DAC consistently
achieves the highest interpretability, ranking first in 13 out of 16
settings. SpeechTokenizer generally ranks second, while Mimi
and EnCodec exhibit lower overall interpretability.
A clear sparsity-dependent trend is observed. At very high
sparsity (s= 5%), all NACs yield negative∆F1 values, with
EnCodec 6kbps showing the largest performance drop. As spar-
sity decreases (s≥25%),∆F1 gradually approaches zero for
all NACs. However, Mimi remains consistently below DAC
and SpeechTokenizer, indicating that its accent information is
less easily decomposed into sparse dimensions.
US vs. Non-US-UK.Here, SpeechTokenizer shows the highest
6011
Table 2:Comparison of information encoding in the US vs. UK
setting across NACs andqwhens= 5%.∆F1 (%) is reported
for full SAE activationsz(first row of each section), position-
only featuresz pos (second row), and magnitude-only features
zmag (third row). Higher value indicates better interpretability.
Latent Ratioq2 5 10 20
EnCodec 6kbps-17.25 -15.64 -20.37 -19.70
Position -39.06-19.16-38.90 -45.06
Magnitude-19.64-25.82-25.58 -20.67
DAC-5.59 -9.46 -3.36 -7.29
Position -9.80 -12.04 -9.88 -10.93
Magnitude-5.00 -5.08 -4.78 -3.32
Mimi-6.43 -9.72 -7.69 -8.82
Position-8.12 -10.49 -8.64 -9.27
Magnitude -38.87 -19.02 -24.70 -22.46
SpeechTokenizer-4.54 -5.21 -5.83 -6.33
Position-7.20 -7.09 -6.76 -7.20
Magnitude -23.82 -29.38 -23.62 -27.03
interpretability, ranking first∆F1 in 14 out of 16 configurations.
The sparsity trend remains similar: at high sparsity, EnCodec
exhibits the largest degradation, whereas SpeechTokenizer and
DAC perform relatively stable. As sparsity decreases,∆F1 ap-
proaches zero or becomes positive for SpeechTokenizer, indi-
cating accent information can be decomposed into sparse di-
mensions and entangled information is removed.
Overall, although phonetic-oriented NACs (Mimi and
SpeechTokenizer) retain more raw accent information than
acoustic-oriented NACs (EnCodec and DAC), as shown in Ta-
ble 1, it does not necessarily imply higher interpretability.
4.2. Analysis: position vs. magnitude
Table 2 reports the∆F1 (%) of training LR on the full SAE
activationz, and its derived position-only (zpos) and magnitude-
only (zmag) features fors= 5%in US vs. UK setting. We focus
ons= 5%as it exhibits the largest discrepancy across NACs.
From Table 2, we draw the following observations:
Acoustic NACs encode accent information primarily in ac-
tivation magnitude.For acoustic-oriented NACs, the∆F1
from magnitude-only features is generally better than that from
position-only features. This indicates for acoustic NACs, accent
information is largely reflected in the strength of sparse activa-
tions rather than their positions of activations.
Phonetic NACs encode accent information primarily in ac-
tivation position.In contrast, for phonetic-oriented NACs,
magnitude-only features result in more negative∆F1 compared
to position-only features. This suggests that accent information
in phonetic NACs is mainly encoded in the position of activated
dimensions rather than their magnitudes.
Among all NACs, EnCodec-6kbps exhibits the most nega-
tive∆F1 when using position-only features, suggesting that the
position may not be informative for accents. We hypothesize
that for EnCodec-6kbps, the SAE struggles to decompose in-
formation into distinct dimensions, making the position indices
less discriminative. To investigate this, in Fig. 4, we present the
activation density distribution over the latent space ofzon the
test set whenq=2 ands=0.05, whered z is grouped into 16 or-
dered groups for clarity. We observe that EnCodec-6kbps shows
a notably non-uniform activation distribution compared to other
NACs, suggesting poor decomposition across dimensions. Con-
sequently, results from position-only features suffer degradation
due to interference from entangled information.
Table 3:Bitrate analysis of EnCodec models in the US vs. UK
setting.∆F1 (%) is reported under different latent ratioqand
sparsitys. Higher value indicates stronger interpretability.
1.5 kbps 6 kbps 12 kbps
q s= 5% 10%s= 5% 10%s= 5% 10%
2-7.25 -2.52-17.25 -9.28 -17.78 -13.69
5-7.05 -2.91-15.64 -6.81 -16.51 -11.86
10-9.66 -5.00-20.37 -12.29 -16.30 -9.06
20-8.72 -4.40-19.70 -6.94 -23.18 -8.06
Figure 4:Activation density distribution across ordered latent
dimensions on the test set. Dimensions inzare divided into 16
sequential groups; the x-axis shows group index and the y-axis
shows activation density.
4.3. Analysis: bitrate
To explore the impact of bitrate on interpretability of accent
information, we perform comparison between EnCodec under
different bitrates (1.5, 6 and 12 kbps) for US vs. UK setting.
From Table 3, while Encodec models across different bitrates
provide similar reference performance (Table 1), their inter-
pretability levels decrease noticeably as bitrate increases. In
particular, the 1.5 kbps model exhibits the smallest performance
drop (i.e.,∆F1<10%), indicating higher interpretability. One
possible explanation is that the lower-bitrate model relies on
fewer codebooks, which may make accent information easier to
decompose. We will explore how bitrate affects interpretability
in other NACs in future work.
5. Conclusion, Limitations, & Future work
In this work, we propose a framework to quantify the task-
level interpretability of Neural Audio Codecs (NACs) and
demonstrate its effectiveness using a representative paralinguis-
tic feature–accent as a case study. We employ Sparse Autoen-
coders (SAEs) to extract interpretable sparse activations from
NAC representations and further decompose them into position
and magnitude representations for detailed analysis. We evalu-
ate four NAC models under 16 SAE configurations, using∆F1
as an interpretability index. Our results show that DAC and
SpeechTokenizer achieve the highest interpretability. We ob-
serve that acoustic-oriented NACs primarily encode accent in-
formation in activation magnitudes, whereas phonetic-oriented
NACs rely more on activation positions. Finally, we find that
lower-bitrate variant of EnCodec exhibits higher interpretabil-
ity than its higher-bitrate counterparts.
This work provides a foundation for future research in NAC
interpretability. We note that our framework is intended to eval-
uate task-level interpretability. We also acknowledge that ab-
solute sparse capacity may affect comparisons involving lower-
dimensional NACs such as EnCodec. In the future, we plan to
extend this framework to more NAC models, investigate phe-
nomena such as feature splitting and feature steering, and ex-
plore interpretability across other paralinguistic attributes.
6012
6. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Office of the Director of Na-
tional Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA), via the ARTS Program under con-
tract D2023-2308110001. The views and conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or
implied, of ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S.
Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints
for governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright an-
notation therein.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
We used ChatGPT-5.2 to assist with polishing the writing of
this paper. All substantive content and contributions of the
manuscript were developed by the authors.