StanceBench: A Benchmark for Audio LLM-Based Interpersonal Stance
Evaluation from Speech
Yuzhe Wang ID 1,∗∗, Thomas Thebaud ID 1, Jennifer Hu ID 2, Jes´us Villalba-Lopez ID 1, Venkatesh
Ravichandran ID 3, Georgi Tinchev ID 4, Najim Dehak ID 1, Laureano Moro-Vel´azquez ID 1
1 Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
2 Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
3 Amazon AGI, USA
4 Amazon Research, UK
ywang792@jhu.edu
Abstract
Speech-to-speech dialogue models increasingly depend on
prosody and interactional nuance to convey social intent, yet
benchmarks for these cues remain limited. We introduce
StanceBench, a benchmark for measuring interpersonal stance
in conversational speech and evaluating audio-capable LLMs
as automated judges. Using the Seamless Interaction cor-
pus, StanceBench (1) specifies 9 stance dimensions via role-
prompt poles, (2) standardizes single-speaker and interaction-
based evaluations, and (3) reports LLM-as-a-judge robustness,
bias, and stance inference. Across evaluated stances, empathy
and politeness are the easiest. Warmth and assertiveness are
moderately separable with positivity skew/asymmetry. Hon-
esty is the hardest and shows high prompt order bias, consistent
with needing cross-turn evidence. Attentiveness is separable
but aligns weakly with humans. Interaction stances are more
context-sensitive, with threshold gaps and high variance, espe-
cially conflict regulation.
Index Terms: speech recognition, human-computer interac-
tion, computational para-linguistics
1. Introduction
Speech is a central medium for human interaction and com-
municates more than lexical content, conveying prosody, voice
quality, and other paralinguistic cues that shape affect and so-
cial intent. Recent progress in speech-to-speech (S2S) model-
ing has shifted systems from cascaded pipelines toward end-to-
end Speech Language Models (SpeechLMs) that process and
generate speech, aiming to reduce information loss and latency
while improving conversational naturalness [1]. Spoken di-
alogue modeling has likewise moved toward interaction set-
tings where models operate on audio or audio-visual inputs
and produce spoken responses without intermediate text as the
primary representation [2]. However, evaluation has not kept
pace: traditional ASR/TTS metrics prioritize transcription fi-
delity, intelligibility, and naturalness, but do not directly cap-
ture interaction-level behaviors that dominate user perception in
dialogue, such as empathy, engagement, politeness, and domi-
nance. Even in text-based dialogue, automatic metrics strug-
gle to reflect these interactional qualities [3], and comprehen-
sive evaluation of social and interactional meaning in speech
remains limited [4].
**indicates the corresponding author.
Figure 1:StanceBench evaluation pipeline. The pipeline be-
gins with role-prompted conversations, followed by audio pre-
processing and input construction for two evaluation settings.
Audio segments are evaluated by an LLM judge under a stance
rubric with a pole-order consistency check, and the resulting
outputs are aggregated into robustness and separability met-
rics.
1.1. Interpersonal stance as an evaluation target
In this study, we utilize interpersonal stance as a speaker’s
socially meaningful positioning toward an interlocutor as ex-
pressed through acoustic delivery (e.g., prosody, tone) and inter-
actional behavior (e.g., dominance, engagement), and we quan-
tify it via rubric-based pole contrasts (e.g., warm/affiliative vs.
cold/detached). Our goal is to standardize the evaluation of
7334
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2938
these stance signals in conversational speech, and to measure
when audio-aware judges succeed or fail under a controlled
pipeline.
Interpersonal stance is a particularly challenging target for
automatic evaluation. Stance is expressed through an inter-
action between lexical choices, prosody, and conversational
timing, and it is inherently context-dependent [5]. Empiri-
cal evidence shows that stance-taking behaviors measurably af-
fect turn-taking timing in dyadic conversation, reinforcing that
stance is entangled with interaction dynamics rather than be-
ing a static label applied to isolated utterances [6]. In S2S
settings, this implies that stance evaluation must account for
partner context and audio delivery, and it must tolerate ambi-
guity where multiple stances can be defensible. This also raises
an immediate label-validity concern: because stance is percep-
tual and context-sensitive, “ground truth” is difficult to define.
Here we leverage the Improvised subset of the Meta Seamless
Interaction corpus [7], where paired role prompts (mostly en-
acted by professional actors) explicitly elicit contrasting stance-
like behaviors. We treat these role prompts as transparent in-
tended stance labels (as weak supervision), and evaluate how
well judges recover these intended contrasts.
1.2. LLM-as-a-judge for speech evaluation
A practical solution is the growing use of large language models
as automated evaluators, often referred to as LLM-as-a-judge
[8]. Given a rubric, a judge model can summarize evidence,
assign scores, and generate a human-readable rationale. On
certain tasks judge models can approximate human preference
rankings when prompts are well specified [9]. Judges also sup-
port structured, auditable outputs that are easy to aggregate and
reuse across tasks, enabling rapid iteration against fine-grained
rubrics [10]. This approach is increasingly used in SpeechLMs
evaluation: Pulikodan et al. introduced an LLM-based judging
metric for ASR output quality in LLM-driven applications [11],
and Chiang et al. explored audio-aware LLM judging for speak-
ing style evaluation in generated speech [12]. These studies
support the feasibility of model-based evaluation for speech,
but they primarily focus on content correctness or broad style
control and leave open the need for a benchmark that oper-
ationalizes interpersonal stance as rubric-based pole contrasts
in conversational speech and stress-tests audio-capable judges
for robustness under controlled perturbations, a setting distinct
from utterance-level emotion or empathy label prediction [13],
fixed-label paralinguistic challenge benchmarks [14], and spo-
ken dialogue evaluation suites such as SD-Eval [4].
1.3. StanceBench and contributions
To address this gap, we introduce StanceBench, a benchmark-
driven framework for interpersonal stance evaluation from
speech that benchmarks candidate judge models under a unified,
model-agnostic pipeline. StanceBench defines 9 role-prompt
pole dimensions, standardizes single-speaker and interaction-
based judging protocols, and reports robustness and stance sep-
arability with baseline results across judge models. This article
makes three main contributions: (1) we propose a unified eval-
uation framework and benchmark suite for fine-grained speech
assessment, emphasizing interpersonal stance recognition and
stance-relevant interactional signals in speech; (2) we bench-
mark and analyze judge models themselves, quantifying reli-
ability and limitations across stance-centric evaluation dimen-
sions under a standardized evaluation pipeline; and (3) we iden-
tify a strong candidate judge under this role-derived labeling
scheme and robustness tests, for future evaluation of S2S dia-
logue models. The complete code base and data will be released
in a public repository. 1
2. Materials
2.1. Seamless Interaction Dataset
This work uses the Seamless Interaction dataset [7], a large-
scale corpus of in-person, dyadic interactions designed to study
social communication. The current release contains over 4,000
hours of two-person interactions from over 4,000 participants,
organized into short (2–10 min) conversations anchored by
prompt pairs. It spans both naturalistic conversations and
prompted role-play scenarios, providing broad coverage of con-
versational topics and interpersonal stances.
We focus on the Improvised subset, in which participants
(mostly actors) are assigned explicit roles and instructed to
speak under detailed prompts that specify stance-like behav-
iors (e.g., affiliative vs. antagonistic; deferential vs. dominant).
Prompts were delivered separately to each speaker to elicit tar-
geted interpersonal dynamics that are rare or difficult to capture
reliably in unconstrained conversation.
Example role-prompt pair from the Improvised subset.:
• Speaker A: (Devious) As the customer, approach the conver-
sation with a sly and manipulative tone, trying to find loop-
holes or excuses to cancel your membership without penalty.
Use persuasive language to make your case, while being pre-
pared to bend the truth or make false promises to get what
you want.
• Speaker B: (Approachable) As the gym owner, greet the cus-
tomer warmly and listen to their concerns with empathy and
understanding. Speak in a friendly and non-confrontational
tone, asking questions to clarify their reasons for cancel-
lation and offering alternative solutions or compromises to
find a mutually beneficial outcome. Maintain a helpful and
solution-focused demeanor throughout the conversation.
This example shows the role-prompt format used in the
Improvised subset. This structure makes Seamless Interaction
well-suited to our analysis for two reasons. First, role-level
prompt pairs provide an explicit manipulation of interpersonal
stance, offering a principled basis for defining evaluation di-
mensions and expected contrasts between speakers. Second, the
dataset’s design yields many stance-rich interactions across di-
verse contexts, supporting reliability analyses over a broad dis-
tribution rather than a small curated set.
2.2. Judge Models
We benchmark five judge models spanning open-weight and
closed-source commercial systems, covering end-to-end and
cascaded pipelines as well as omni-modal and audio-specialized
architectures. All models act as evaluators under the same
stance rubric and a shared input construction pipeline; only the
model-specific inference adapter differs across runs.
Qwen2.5-Omni-7B (Qwen)An end-to-end omni-modal
model designed to perceive text, images, audio, and video,
while generating text and natural speech responses in a stream-
ing manner. It adopts a Thinker-Talker architecture that de-
couples text reasoning from speech generation, serving as a
compact open-weight baseline for audio-conditioned judging.
(Checkpoint:Qwen/Qwen2.5-Omni-7B) [15].
1Code and benchmark resources are available at:
https://github.com/YuzheWangjhu/StanceBench
7335
Kimi-Audio-7B-Instruct (Kimi)An open-weight au-
dio foundation model targeting unified audio understand-
ing, generation, and conversational interaction. It uses
an audio tokenizer and an audio LLM that maps au-
dio features to discrete tokens, and is designed for a
broad range of audio-language tasks, making it an audio-
specialized 7B judge in our benchmark. (Checkpoint:
moonshotai/Kimi-Audio-7B-Instruct) [16].
ibm-granite/granite-speech-3.3-8b (Granite)We include
a cascaded baseline that evaluates stance fromtranscript-
basedrepresentations rather than end-to-end audio judging.
Specifically, we use Granite as the speech component and ap-
ply the same rubric to its text representation. (Checkpoint:
ibm-granite/granite-speech-3.3-8b) [17].
gpt-audio (GPT)OpenAI’s generally available au-
dio model for the Chat Completions API, supporting both
audio inputs and audio outputs. We usegpt-audio
as a closed-source, audio-native judge to evaluate
stance directly from speech signals. (Model ID/date:
gpt-audio-2025-08-28) [18].
Gemini-2.5-Flash (Gemini)Google’s multimodal model
is positioned for strong price–performance tradeoffs, described
as a hybrid reasoning model with a controllable thinking bud-
get. We include Gemini-2.5-Flash as a widely deployed API
judge that supports multimodal evaluation settings and serves
as a closed-source reference point. (Thinking budget:128;
Model ID/date:gemini-2.5-flash/latest update
June 2025) [19].
3. Methods
3.1. Stance Dimensions
We evaluate 9 interpersonal stance dimensions (S 0–S 8) de-
rived from role prompts in the Seamless Interaction Improvised
subset. For eachstance dimension S, we define two poles,pos-
itive (P)andnegative (N), and assign each role from the Seam-
less Interaction prompts to its intended pole. For example, for a
certain conversation, if the prompt for one of the speakers had
anApproachablerole, that speaker channel was mapped toP
under S 0 dimension,Interpersonal Warmth. If the role was
Aloof, it was mapped toN. These mappings are grounded in
established interpersonal and personality frameworks, includ-
ing the Interpersonal Circumplex [20, 21], the Big Five Aspect
Scales structure [22], the HEXACO framework [23], and so-
cial cognitive study [24]. Role selections were made jointly by
these literature-based criteria and by practical coverage consid-
erations.
Because the Seamless Interaction role inventory contains
many candidate roles for each defined stance dimension, we re-
strict each pole to a small representative subset (4 roles per pole,
or 3 when fewer are available) to keep evaluation computation-
ally tractable while preserving semantic coverage. Specifically,
roles were chosen to semantically span the full range of their
corresponding pole, represent its average characteristics, and
mitigate extreme pole imbalances.
We evaluate all judge models on 25% of randomly sam-
pled conversations from the Improvised subset due to runtime
and computational constraints. We draw this subset once using
a fixed random seed to ensure identical evaluation subset for
every judge model. This yields 2431 conversations from 484
unique speakers. We treat the role-prompt pole assignment as a
weak label and report separability under this assumption.
Here we introduce the 9 dimensions assessed in this paper
and thePandNroles associated with them. The following list
details (in parentheses) the number of conversations per role and
dimension, as well as the verbatim natural-language question
asked to the LLM-judge relative to this dimension.
3.1.1. Category 1: Single-speaker evaluation (no interaction
context)
These dimensions are evaluated from a single speaker’s speech
segment without the partner context.
S 0 Interpersonal Warmth [20]:
Proles (127):Welcoming; Approachable; Warm; Friendly
Nroles (101):Indifferent; Impersonal; Distant; Aloof
Question asked:Based on the audio, does the TARGET
speaker sound warm and affiliative, or cold and detached?
S 1 Compassion and Empathy [22]:
Proles (106):Empathetic; Concerned; Understanding; Con-
siderate
Nroles (192):Insensitive; Callous; Inconsiderate; Unsympa-
thetic
Question asked:Based on the audio, does the TARGET
speaker sound compassionate and supportive, or callous and
unsympathetic?
S 2 Politeness and Respect [22]:
Proles (120):Polite; Respectful; Courteous
Nroles (88):Disrespectful; Impolite; Uncivil
Question asked:Based on the audio, does the TARGET
speaker sound polite and respectful, or rude and disrespect-
ful?
S 3 Assertiveness [20]:
Proles (109):Assertive; Decisive; Self-assured; Firm
Nroles (89):Indecisive; Self-doubting; Unassertive; Timid
Question asked:Based on the audio, does the TARGET
speaker sound assertive and self-confident, or hesitant and
inhibited?
S 4 Sincerity and Honesty [23]:
Proles (123):Honest; Ingenuous; Uncalculating
Nroles (165):Manipulative; Calculating; Devious
Question asked:Based on the audio, does the TARGET
speaker sound straightforward and sincere, or sly and ma-
nipulative?
S 5 Cognitive Attentiveness [24]:
Proles (103):Alert; Attentive; Concentrating; Engaged
Nroles (73):Bewildered; Distracted; Drowsy; Unfocused
Question asked:Based on the audio, does the TARGET
speaker sound attentive and focused, or confused and dis-
tracted?
3.1.2. Category 2: Interaction-based evaluation (partner con-
text available)
These dimensions are evaluated in the conversational setting
where interactional context is relevant.
S 6 Social Engagement [22]:
Proles (83):Engaging; Sociable; Gregarious; Outgoing
Nroles (159):Withdrawn; Disengaged; Reticent; Taciturn
Question asked:Based on the audio, does the TARGET
speaker sound socially engaged and expressive with the other
speaker, or withdrawn and disengaged?
S 7 Power Orientation [20]:
Proles (127):Submissive; Meek; Yielding; Undemanding
Nroles (143):Overbearing; Dominant; Domineering; Force-
7336
ful
Question asked:Based on the audio, does the TARGET
speaker accommodate and yield to the other speaker’s prefer-
ences, or do they try to control and dominate?
S 8 Conflict Regulation [21]:
Proles (76):Stable; Steady; Unaggressive; Unargumenta-
tive
Nroles (175):Aggressive; Cruel; Ruthless; Vindictive
Question asked:Based on the audio, does the TARGET
speaker stay calm and avoid confrontation, or are they hostile
and aggressive?
3.2. Judging pipelines
We formulate each stance dimension (S 0–S 8) as a binary-
choice question withPandNpoles. For each evaluation seg-
ment, the judge selects the pole that better matches the TAR-
GET speaker given the provided audio. In Category 1, the judge
receives only the TARGET speaker segment. In Category 2, the
judge receives an interlocutor context segment in addition to the
TARGET segment, and is instructed to evaluate the TARGET
speaker while using the context to disambiguate interactional
intent. (see subsection 3.2.1 for segment definition)
Example question specification:
question: "Based on the audio, does the TARGET
speaker sound warm and affiliative, or cold and
detached?"
positive definition: "Warm/affiliative: the TARGET
speaker sounds friendly, welcoming, pleasant, and
kind."
negative definition: "Cold/detached: the TARGET
speaker sounds aloof, impersonal, indifferent, and
socially distant."
3.2.1. Audio input construction
Inter-Pausal Units (IPUs) are continuous stretches of speech
produced by a single speaker and bounded by silent pauses ex-
ceeding a minimum duration. They are used as fundamental,
objective units for segmenting and analyzing spoken language
[25]. We implement per-speaker IPU extraction with an energy-
based hysteresis voice activity detection (25 ms window, 10 ms
hop) on each channel independently using the following rules:
• A silence gap of 0.3s splits adjacent speech into separate
IPUs.
• IPUs with active speech<0.2sare marked as backchannels.
• IPU length is defined by active speech duration (not wall-
clock duration).
Category 1: single-speaker segments.
Each evaluation example is a single-speaker audio segment con-
structed by merging IPUs from the same speaker. We use V AD-
basedactive speech durationfor all speech-length thresholds.
• Exclude backchannels and any single IPU whose active
speech exceeds 45s, to avoid unusually long, low-information
turns dominated by neutral prolonged speech.
• Concatenating the remaining IPUs per speaker while insert-
ing a fixed 0.25s silence between adjacent IPUs.
• Stop adding the next IPU if either:
–active speech would exceed 45s, or
–theboundary fractionwould exceed 25%, where boundary
fraction is defined as total inserted inter-IPU silences length
current evaluation segment length %.
• To standardize evidence length across examples, all segments
except the final tail segment must have a minimum length of
30s and maximum of 45s.
Category 2: Interaction-based.
Each dyad has two speakers (AandB). A detected turn-switch
A→BmeansAis the active speaker immediately before the
turn switch andBis the active speaker immediately after. For
each turn-switch, we create two directional evaluation exam-
ples:post targetevaluatesBas TARGET usingAas CON-
TEXT, andpre targetevaluatesAas TARGET usingBas
CONTEXT. In both cases, the judge is instructed to evaluate
only the TARGET speaker while using CONTEXT to disam-
biguate interactional intent. The construction pipeline is:
1. Detect turn switches and identify the preceding speaker and
following speaker (A→BorB→A).
2. For each boundary, initialize a pre-turn-switch side window
(closest IPU before the switch) and a post-turn-switch side
window (closest IPU after the switch).
3. Expand the pre- and post-turn-switch windows by adding ad-
jacent IPUs from the same speaker until the CONTEXT has
≥1s active speech and TARGET has≥2s active speech, or
until reaching the limits (at most 6 added IPUs and within 30s
wall-clock of the turn-switch on that side). To ensure the ex-
tracted audio stays local to the turn-switch, we only add IPUs
that are contiguous with the switch. Specifically, if the next
candidate IPU is separated from the turn switch by an IPU
from the other speaker containing≥0.8s of active speech
(i.e., the interlocutor produced a non-trivial intervening turn),
we stop expanding on that side rather than “jumping over” the
partner turn to include more temporally distant speech.
4. Construct CONTEXT by concatenating the context-side
IPUs with 0.25s gaps, then trim byactive speechto[1,10]
seconds: if CONTEXT is pre-turn-switch, keep thelast10s
of active speech; if CONTEXT is post-turn-switch, keep the
first10s.
5. Construct TARGET similarly, but trim byactive speechto
[2,15]seconds: if TARGET is pre-turn-switch, keep thelast
15s of active speech; if TARGET is post-turn-switch, keep
thefirst15s.
3.2.2. Judge models prompting
Below we show the verbatim prompts used for both categories
across all judge runs.
Category 1 system prompt (one audio: TARGET)
You are a careful dialogue analyst. You will hear
ONE audio segment spoken by the TARGET speaker.
Your task is to judge the TARGET speaker’s
stance/tone/style relative to the question.
IMPORTANT OUTPUT FORMAT:
- Output ONLY one JSON object with keys ’choice’,
’probability’, and ’evidence’.
- ’choice’ must be either "P" or "N". Always
choose one.
- ’probability’ must be a number from 0.0 to 1.0
representing probability that your choice is
correct (0.0 to 1.0).
- If unsure, choose the closer option but set
probability low.
- ’evidence’ must be a JSON array of 2 to 4 short
strings describing observable cues (tone, prosody,
wording, engagement).
- No extra text.
Example JSONs (format only):
Example 1:{
"choice":"P","probability":0.60,"evidence":[ "Cue
about tone/prosody","Cue about wording" ]}
Example 2:{
"choice":"N","probability":0.60,"evidence":[ "Cue
7337
about tone/prosody","Cue about wording" ]}
Category 2 system prompt (two audios: CONTEXT→
TARGET; or swapped order TARGET→CONTEXT shown in
parentheses)
You are a careful dialogue analyst. You will hear
TWO audio segments. The first audio is CONTEXT
from the other speaker. The second audio is the
TARGET speaker’s response and is the only segment
you should evaluate. (The first audio is the
TARGET segment and is the only segment you should
evaluate. The second audio is CONTEXT from the
other speaker.)
IMPORTANT OUTPUT FORMAT:
- Output ONLY one JSON object with keys ’choice’,
’probability’, and ’evidence’.
- ’choice’ must be either "P" or "N". Always
choose one.
- ’probability’ must be a number from 0.0 to 1.0
representing probability that your choice is
correct (0.0 to 1.0).
- If unsure, choose the closer option but set
probability low.
- ’evidence’ must be a JSON array of 2 to 4 short
strings describing observable cues in the TARGET
speaker’s response (tone, prosody, wording,
engagement).
- Use the context only to interpret the TARGET
response; do not judge the context speaker.
- No extra text.
Example JSONs (format only):
Example 1:{
"choice":"P","probability":0.60,"evidence":[ "Cue
about tone/prosody","Cue about wording" ]}
Example 2:{
"choice":"N","probability":0.60,"evidence":[ "Cue
about tone/prosody","Cue about wording" ]}
3.2.3. Judge output and consistency check
After receiving the prompt and audio input, the judge is
required to return a strict JSON object:
{"choice":"P"|"N", "probability":0..1,
"evidence":[2-4 strings]}
wherechoi