The Interspeech 2026 Challenge on Transfer of Pragmatic Intent in
Speech-to-Speech Translation
Nigel G. Ward 1,∗∗, Marcel de Korte1, Javier Vazquez 1, Montserrat G. Molina1, Vanessa Bolado1,
Carol Figueroa1, Eliya Nachmani2, John E. Ortega 3, Satoshi Nakamura4
1University of Texas at El Paso, USA 2Ben Gurion University, Israel
3Northeastern University, USA 4Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzen, China
nigelward@acm.org, mdekorte@utep.edu, jvazquez073015@gmail.com, mgmolina1313@gmail.com,
vanessa.bolado.garcia@gmail.com, cfigueroa2@utep.edu, eliyanac@bgu.ac.il,
johneortega@gmail.com, snakamura@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract
The Interspeech 2026 challenge task on Transfer of Pragmatic
Intent in Speech-to-Speech Translation was motivated by the
fact that current speech-to-speech translation systems do not
prioritize pragmatic fidelity, and thus do not ideally support
people conversing across languages. This paper describes the
design, datasets, and evaluation methods for the challenge, and
the results for the submissions. We find that even the best sys-
tem lags human performance by 1.2 points on a 5-point scale,
and note strengths and weaknesses of our evaluation methods.
Index Terms: pragmatic fidelity, subjective evaluation, auto-
matic evaluation, dialog, conversation, prosody, benchmarking
1. Motivation
Speech-to-speech translation (S2ST) has the potential to enable
people to communicate conversationally across language bar-
riers, fostering personal fulfillment, social inclusion, and eco-
nomic growth. Recent years have seen tremendous progress, but
current speech-to-speech translation systems, while adequate
for some purposes, are not entirely well matched to the needs
involved in supporting dialog [1]. In particular, their outputs
are usually insensitive to the interpersonal and pragmatic goals
[2, 3, 4, 5] that are present in many source utterances. For exam-
ple, given the inputdid you see her?with its specific prosody
— perhaps showing breathless interest, encouraging the inter-
locutor to continue his story, and displaying sensitivity to the
complex emotions he’s feeling after a break-up — the output
should ideally translate not only the lexical content, but also
these elements of stance and intent.
One reason that current systems tend to omit such elements
is that pragmatic fidelity has never been systematically evalu-
ated. To date, S2ST evaluations have focused on mainly on se-
mantic fidelity and output naturalness. We accordingly created
a challenge task and invited all comers to test their systems’
ability to transfer pragmatic intent across languages.
Through this challenge task, we aimed to 1) measure how
well current technology succeeds at this aspect of translation, 2)
discover what types of pragmatic functions are not well handled
by current technology, and 3) explore the validity of pragmatics-
related evaluation methods for S2ST.
2. Related Work
This challenge task aligns with current interest in S2ST, and es-
pecially in expanding its scope, as seen, for example, in the re-
**indicates the corresponding author.
cent flowering of work on speaker-property transfer and transfer
of emotion and expressiveness through prosody [6, 7].
It also aligns with recent initiatives to improve the evalua-
tion of S2ST [8, 9, 10, 11]. Beyond metrics for semantic fidelity
and naturalness, recent work has also considered preservation
of speaker identity and emotion, latency and isochrony, spatial
cues, and aspects of style and expressivity [12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20], however, only one pragmatic function has re-
ceived significant attention: emphasis [21, 22, 23, 24]. Despite
such advances, evaluation in S2ST still relies heavily on meth-
ods derived from the more mature fields of speech synthesis
and machine translation [25, 26, 27]. However, S2ST is essen-
tially different: it involves more information than is present in
text alone, especially the extra pragmatic meanings that are con-
veyed largely through prosody. The current challenge is the first
to focus on these aspects of S2ST.
3. Task and Data
The overall task aim was for systems to produce pragmatically-
faithful translations of utterances taken from conversations.
There was an English-to-Spanish direction and a Spanish-to-
English one (En→Es and Es→En, respectively).
Our data strategy prioritized quality over quantity. We
wanted to include a diverse sampling of pragmatic functions,
especially of the types that are common in natural conversa-
tions. We also wanted to ensure that the pragmatic functions
were as similar as possible for every source-target pair.
The test data was derived from 10 conversations among
5 Spanish-English bilinguals, speaking American English and
Northern Mexican Spanish. These conversations were un-
scripted and unprompted, and covered numerous topics, such as
pets, cooking, teaching, and taking classes. Following our exist-
ing protocol [28], from these original conversations, the partic-
ipants jointly selected topics where the conversation was lively
or interesting in some way, and re-enacted selected utterances
from those topics in the other language. These utterances were
typically sentence-length, averaging 2.5 seconds, but ranging
from 0.4 s to 6.0 s. The re-enactments were done carefully, with
the original participants making as many attempts as needed un-
til they both were satisfied that each utterance closely matched
the original in tone and communicative intent.
The test data consisted of these utterances and re-
enactments: 240 in the English-to-Spanish direction and 199
in the Spanish-to-English direction. We were prepared to also
provide metadata, corrected transcripts, and utterance contexts,
but no particpating team requested these.
980
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-390
For training, due to the dearth of parallel speech-to-speech
data, especially conversational data, we expected teams to rely
on other resources and on indirect training methods [29, 30].
However a small set of matched training data was available,
namely 2893 English-Spanish utterance pairs [28, 31] collected
using the same protocol, recorded in the same studio, and with
speakers from the same demographic, and thus well matched
and potentially useful for tuning hyperparameters, etc.
4. Subjective Evaluation Protocol
Our evaluation strategy also prioritized quality, rather than num-
ber of metrics or number of judges. Thus we had four Spanish-
English bilinguals score the pragmatic fidelity of each transla-
tion: they rated each in terms of “pragmatic fidelity to the orig-
inal, in terms of tone, feeling, and intent.” We did not provide
definitions for any of these terms, but we did explain that the
target scenario was S2ST for conversational communication, so
participants were implicitly guided to focus on the quality as-
pects relevant to successful communication. We stressed that
they were to rate only pragmatic fidelity, and in particular to
disregard differences in speaker characteristics and differences
in the semantic content of the translations. In the end, partic-
ipants appeared to interpret “pragmatic fidelity” fairly broadly,
as discussed below. Ratings were on a scale from 1 (no simi-
larity) to 5 (equivalent) and entered directly, to two significant
digits, on a spreadsheet.
For each original utterance, they rated three candidate trans-
lations: two from S2ST systems and the human re-enactment.
Rating one set of candidates involved ten listenings: partic-
ipants first heard the original twice, then the first candidate
twice, then the original, then the second candidate twice, then
the original, and finally the third candidate twice. The candi-
dates were presented in random order. We replayed utterances
as often as participants requested.
Participants needed to be able to listen closely, make sen-
sitive judgments, reflect on why they made these judgments,
and maintain sustained attention. We therefore recruited partic-
ipants carefully. All were students or former students of the
University of Texas at EL Paso. Two had been involved in
creation of the test data, so at times they were judging trans-
lations of their own utterances, including by themselves. Par-
ticipants were compensated generously by local standards: $70
plus lunch for 3 hours of work.
In total, each participant judged 59 sets, for 177 total rat-
ings. For the first six sets, we asked participants to share their
perceptions and reasons for their ratings, focus-group style, and
allowed them to change their ratings after discussion. After that
they made their ratings independently. Finally we had a quali-
tative phase, where they listented again to the first ten sets and
discussed the factors influencing their judgments and what they
perceived as the common patterns of strengths and weaknesses.
5. Automated Evaluation Metric
The automated metric compares the system output to the re-
enactment. (While, for the subjective evaluation, the latter was
evaluated with the others on an equal footing, here it was taken
as the gold standard.) Specifically, we use the Segura metric
[32], which estimates the pragmatic similarity between any two
utterances of English (respectively, of Spanish). This computes
the cosine similarity between the representations of two utter-
ances in terms of a subset of average-pooled HuBert features:
103 features (respectively 101 for Spanish). In contrast to other
similarly-motivated evaluation metrics, this aims to measure
pragmatic appropriateness directly, rather than via aspects of the
prosody [33, 34]. We used this metric out-of-the-box, although
it was not designed specifically for the task of S2ST evalua-
tion. However it was tuned to maximize match to a large col-
lection of human judgments of “pragmatic similarity in terms of
tone, feeling, intent” [35], which is essentially the same instru-
ment used here in the subjective evaluation. Morever, our recent
exploration of its suitability for this purpose found it to often
match human perceptions of similarity in S2ST [36]. However,
that work also noted two weaknesses. First, while applicable to
both systems that output audio and those that output features,
it does not support comparisons across the two conditions: it
appears to be easier to specify the necessary prosody than to
actually synthesize an utterance with actual words. Second,
the metric is occasionally over-sensitive to nuances of hesitancy
and confidence.
6. Challenge Task Logistics
We originally offered three conditions of participation. One was
designed to enable participation by researchers with insights in
how specific prosodic patterns serve various functions in the
two languages, but who might lack extensive modeling skills.
In this condition, teams were to map from a 100-feature de-
scription of the prosody of an utterance in one language to a
100-feature description of a pragmatically equivalent utterance
in the other [37]. However no teams took up this challenge, so
in the end there was participation in only two conditions:
C1. S2ST Systems. In this condition, the input and output
were both audio.
C2. Feature-Mapping Systems. In this condition, both
input and output were feature vectors that captured the key
pragmatics-related aspects of utterances. There were the fea-
tures mentioned above: 103 features for the English utterances
and 101 for the Spanish respectively. Thus, for the English-
to-Spanish direction, systems were required to map from 103
features to 101, and conversely. For this condition, to lower the
barriers to entry, we released a Jupyter notebook with a baseline
system, described below. For this we modified the original code
[36] to make it easier to swap in new models, or, with a little
more effort, to try new loss functions or training data.
As seen in Figure 1, the S2ST systems were evaluated both
by human judgments and by the automated metric. However, as
noted above, the results of the latter are not comparable across
the two conditions.
Submission of feature-mapping systems were processed
through CodaBench [38] and the scores automatically com-
puted, but audio submissions were handled through email.
7. System Descriptions
Although we received numerous expressions of interest, includ-
ing from large corporate teams, and several informal submis-
sions, in the end only 4 teams made official submissions, all
university teams. We attributed the modest amount of partici-
pation to the novelty of the task, to the relatively small size of
the S2ST community, and to the tight timeline, with only seven
weeks from the announcement of the challenge to the submis-
sion due date. Thus we evaluated:
CUHK-SZ(C1, Es→En) The system from the Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzen [39] was a cascaded
pipeline using Whisper for speech recognition, Qwen2.5-
72B-Instruct to translate the Spanish text to English, and
981
Figure 1:Summary of conditions and evaluations.
average std. dev
human 4.59 .36
CUHK-SZ 3.46 .63
Seamless 2.98 .64
Table 1:Spanish to English, audio-to-audio, human ratings of
pragmatic fidelity
FishAudio/OpenaAudio-S1-Mini to synthesize the English
speech. The key innovation was augmenting the synthesizer
input with two prompts: the Spanish source speech and the rec-
ognized Spanish text.
MUC(C2 En→Es) The system from Minzu University of
China (with one team member from the Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzen, who was not part of the team for the other
submission) [40] improved the baseline feature-mapping sys-
tem by replacing the multi-layer perceptron with a transformer,
and by augmenting the loss function to include the Euclidean
distance between target and output in terms of 100 prosodic fea-
tures, specifically, the “Marco” metric’ [34].
BLCU(C2 En→Es) The system from Beijing Language and
Culture University [41] exploited a retrieval approach: its core
module retrieved the 70 most similar English utterances in the
training data and then predicted the Spanish features as the
similarity-weighted average of those of the 70 translations.
PAPTAN(C2, both directions) The team from the Univer-
sit´e Paris Cit ´e [42] created a system that combined ideas from
Seamless and Hibiki [18, 43].
Baseline(C2, both directions) was a simple multi-layer percep-
tron operating over the provided features, and was trained on
the matched data [28, 36].
Seamless(C1, Es→En) [18] was included to have another point
of comparison, since it is open-source and since it performed
best in an earlier evaluation [36].
8. System Performance: Audio Condition
Table 1 shows the subjective evaluation results for the 59 sets.
All differences were significant by a matched-pairs t-test at p<
0.01. While the CUHK-SZ submission outperformed Seamless,
its translations were rated higher than Seamless’s only 77% of
the time, suggesting that the two systems may have complemen-
system Segura
CUHK-SZ 0.7270
Seamless 0.7175
Table 2:Spanish-to-English, audio-to-audio, automatic metric
tary strengths. Interestingly, for one input, CUHK-SZ transla-
tion was rated better than the human re-enactment.
Table 2 shows the results for the automatic metric. Accord-
ing to this also, CUHK-SZ outperforms Seamless, but this dif-
ference was not significant.
8.1. Qualitative Observations
In the qualitative phase, the most commonly mentioned weak-
ness was a translation omitting some kind of pragmatic func-
tion. To probe further, we did a follow-on exploration: we
roughly identified the non-semantic aspects we heard in a sam-
ple of the original utterances; informally grouped them into
common factors, in the spirit of thematic analysis [44]; and tab-
ulated how often these were carried over into the translations.
Across the 32 sets we examined, we counted the originals
to be expressing 107 functions (60 different functions), with the
average utterance expressing 3.3 functions. In contrast CUHK-
SZ conveyed only 30, and Seamless 26: 28% and 24%, respec-
tively. This aligns with the subjective impression, also voiced
by the judges, that both systems had a general tendency to out-
put neutral, read-style speech, devoid of pragmatic intent.
Some aspects were handled relatively well by one or both
systems, notably marking questions and making negative as-
sessments, although neither was common in this data. Of the
more common aspects, marking lexical emphasis and using a
story-telling style or an explaining style were often transfered,
although still omitted around half the time. Other common as-
pects were handled only rarely, including marking a realization,
showing hesitancy, thoughtfulness, or amusement, grounding a
new referent, and using a conversational style. One common
function, positive assessment, was never successfully trans-
fered; nor were a long tail of rarely-seen aspects.
One thing that we had not anticipated was the significance
of stylistic differences, as also noted by the judges. In contrast
to pragmatic-function differences, stylistic differences gener-
982
system score
MUC 0.8601
baseline 0.8574
BLCU 0.8288
PAPTAN 0.6259
Table 3:English-to-Spanish, feature-mapping averages, Segura
metric
system score
baseline 0.8054
PAPTAN 0.5613
Table 4:Spanish-to-English, feature-mapping averages, Segura
metric.
ally reflect the ongoing dialog activity, rather than intents local
to a single utterance. The style of these utterances was gener-
ally low-key, soft-spoken, and casual in style, often superim-
posed with more specific styles, such as storytelling, humorous,
evocative of a scene, or bidding for empathy. In contrast, the
style of the systems’ outputs were generally quite neutral.
Apart from weaknesses of omission, another form of weak-
ness, much less common, involved the presence in the system
output of a pragmatic function that was not present in the in-
put. In some cases the technical causes of this were obvious:
some were related to speech recognition errors, and some re-
lated to prosody, including misinterpretation of input prosody
and glitches of output prosody, such as realizing a slight con-
trast as strong emphasis. Within this category, there seemed
to be a tendency for systems to struggle with the shortest ut-
terances, such asohhh, and with the longest ones, especially
those including reported speech or a within-utterance change of
speaker intention.
Examples appear at [https://www.cs.utep.edu/topi/].
9. System Performance: Features Condition
For the feature-to-feature mapping systems, Tables 3 and 4
show the performance according to the automated metric. Only
one system outperformed the baseline, and that by a very small
amount. Incidentally, the Spanish-to-English direction seems to
be the harder task, as previously observed and discusse in [36].
10. Evaluation Protocol and Metric
Properties
correlations
human vs human, pairwise, avg 0.613
Segura vs avg human 0.512
Marco vs avg human 0.258
Table 5:Spanish to English, agreement over 53 ratings
A secondary goal of the challenge was to understand the
strengths and weaknesses of our subjective evaluation protocol
and of automated metrics.
We first computed the inter-annotator agreement. This
ranged from .48 to .80, averaging 0.61, as seen in 5. From
the qualitative discussion, there was no evidence that the dif-
ferences reflected real disagreements, but rather they appeared
to be mostly be driven by variation in what each judge was
most sensitive to. We also found that the judges did not re-
port difficulty in rating the pragmatic aspects as independent
of other considerations, although they did of course notice the
occasional semantic lapses and audio artifacts. Overall the sub-
jective evaluation protocol appears fairly solid.
Yet one issue did surface: from the qualitative discussion,
we realized that some of the factors that influenced judges’ rat-
ings, while certainly relevant to pragmatic fidelity, might not be
relevant to real use cases. For example, various issues (notably
with discourse markers such asohhh, with hesitation markers
and disfluencies, with indicating the intent to continue, and with
style differences) may be less important in practice, since, in ac-
tual technology-mediated communication, some of these may
be not used, not important, or redundant to postural and gaze
cues, etc. Thus there is scope to refine the criteria and/or the
data selection for future evaluations. However this should be
done wisely, based on examination of the specific needs of spe-
cific use cases, perhaps building on work like [45, 46, 47].
Regarding the quality of the automatic metric, Table 5 sug-
gests that the Segura metric, while certainly not suitable as the
sole basis for evaluation, may have utility as an initial quality
estimator.
The table also shows the correlation with evaluations done
using the Marco metric [34]. This metric compares two ut-
terances by the Euclidean distance over 100 features, with ap-
propriate weights, which describe various aspects of utterance
prosody known to have pragmatic import in various languages,
including pitch range, creakiness, breathiness, lengthening, in-
tensity, etc, each over windows that together span the whole
utterances. It did not perform well..
11. Conclusions and Prospects
In this paper we have presented a novel challenge task for
speech-to-speech translation, with unique aims, data, and eval-
uation methods. Although small in scale, interesting findings
emerged.
Regarding performance, we find that the gap between the
best system and human performance is 1.2 points, on a 5-point
scale, and thus there is still lots of room for improvement. The
performance gap between a top open-source system and the top
research system is 0.5 points, suggesting that some improve-
ment may be readily deployable. Further, while existing sys-
tems have many strengths, there are many pragmatic functions
that are not translated reliably, as are many aspects of style.
Regarding evaluation, we find that a simple protocol for ob-
taining human judgments of pragmatic fidelity is reliable, with
judges’ ratings mutually correlating at around 0.61. We also
find that automated metric correlates 0.51 with human judg-
ments.
To support future evaluation of methods for improving
pragmatic fidelity, we release the inputs and target outputs (the
re-enactments), and to support further research on metrics and
protocols, we release the outputs of two systems and the judges’
quality ratings, all at [redacted].
Overall, our hope is that these findings and resources will
inform linguistic inquiry and the design of S2ST models, loss
functions, and training data. Over the long term, this should
enable the development of systems able to better translate prag-
matic intent, and thereby better support speakers who need to go
beyond just conveying information, to explain, convince, teach,
entertain, and do all the things that are so easy in one’s own
language, but currently so difficult across language barriers.
983
Acknowledgments:We thank the National Science Foundation
for support under IIS-2348085, “Modeling Prosody for Speech-
to-Speech Translation, “ and R. Emiliano Puchaicela for help
with the thematic analysis.
Use of Generative AI Disclosure:None
12. References
[1] D. J. Liebling, M. Lahav, A. Evans, A. Donsbach, J. Holbrook,
B. Smus, and L. Boran, “Unmet needs and opportunities for mo-
bile translation AI,” inProceedings of the CHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems, 2020, paper 134.
[2] A. Popescu-Belis, “Dimensionality of dialogue act tagsets: An
empirical analysis of large corpora,”Language Resources and
Evaluation, vol. 42, pp. 99–107, 2008.
[3] E. Couper-Kuhlen and M. Selting,Interactional Linguistics.
Cambridge University Press, 2018.
[4] M. Weisser, “Speech acts in corpus pragmatics: Making the case
for an extended taxonomy,”International Journal of Corpus Lin-
guistics, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 400–425, 2020.
[5] H. Bunt and V . Petukhova, “Semantic and pragmatic precision
in conversational AI systems,”