CLEAR: Clinical LLM Embedding and Attention-based Reconstruction
Eashita Wazed ID 1, Hieyong Jeong ID 1,∗∗, Choonsung Shin 1, Shima Okada 2
1 Dept. of Artificial Intelligence Convergence, Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea
2 Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University, Japan
{eashitawazed, h.jeong, cshin}@jnu.ac.kr and s-okada@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract
Clinical heart sound analysis is vital for cardiovascular diag-
nosis but is frequently disrupted by non-stationary noise. To
overcome the limitations of traditional methods, we propose
CLEAR: Clinical LLM Embedding and Attention-based Re-
construction. Given noisy audio, a pretrained Whisper encoder
extracts high-dimensional semantic embeddings. A Graph At-
tention Network (GAT) models these as graph nodes to predict
latent masks, isolating pure heart sounds. A Latent Genera-
tive Adversarial Network (GAN) then refines these represen-
tations to generate distortion-free signals. Evaluated under 10
dB SNR environmental noise, CLEAR demonstrated an excep-
tional peak restoration capability, achieving a maximum PESQ
of 4.64 and SI-SDR of 64.35 dB from severely degraded inputs
(PESQ 1.03, SI-SDR -29.37 dB). By delivering natural, artifact-
free audio, CLEAR significantly enhances clinical auscultation
and early disease detection.
Index Terms: heart sound separation, clinical denoising, early
diagnosis, LLM-embedding, mask-based separation
1. Introduction
Heart sound analysis and denoising are fundamental problems
in bio-signal processing, with broad applications in clinical di-
agnosis, electronic stethoscopes, telemedicine, and computer-
aided diagnosis (CAD) systems. The primary objective is to
recover clean heart sound signals (S1, S2, and murmurs) from
auscultation recordings corrupted by hospital background noise,
device friction, or patient respiration. When physicians rely on
stethoscopes for diagnosis in clinical settings, ambient noise
acts as the greatest obstacle, often masking subtle murmurs
and hindering accurate early diagnosis. Despite its impor-
tance, achieving robust heart sound separation in dynamic, real-
world clinical environments remains a significant open chal-
lenge. Heart sound enhancement [1] has traditionally relied
on signal processing techniques such as bandpass filtering and
wavelet transforms [2]. While these methods established the
foundation for noise reduction, they heavily depend on station-
ary assumptions about the underlying noise profiles [3]. Con-
sequently, in complex and non-stationary clinical acoustic en-
vironments, or when noise overlaps with the frequency bands
of heart sounds, these methods often fail, leading to severe dis-
tortion of essential diagnostic features. In the past few years,
significant research in speech and audio enhancement has been
proposed [4, 5], including real-time speech enhancement [6, 7].
Audio source separation [8, 9], speech separation [9], and de-
noising models [10] have also been introduced. However, im-
provements in heart sound audio processing and clinical diag-
**indicates the corresponding author.
nosis have not been as significant [11]. Data-driven deep learn-
ing models for audio separation [12], particularly those based
on convolutional and recurrent neural networks [13], have ad-
vanced the field by learning complex time–frequency mappings
[14, 15]. Nevertheless, these models frequently struggle due to
a lack of high-level semantic understanding of the audio con-
tent [16]. Because they focus primarily on local acoustic fea-
tures rather than the broader context of the entire cardiac cycle,
their capacity to cleanly separate highly overlapping environ-
mental noise from subtle heart sounds is inherently constrained
[17]. To overcome these limitations and contribute to prac-
tical clinical diagnostics, this study proposes CLEAR (Clini-
cal LLM Embedding and Attention-based Reconstruction), a
highly robust heart sound separation architecture. The frame-
work is uniquely designed in three sequential stages. We utilize
a pretrained large-scale audio language model (LLM) [18], such
as Whisper, to extract long-sequence acoustic embeddings [19].
Although originally trained on speech, this model demonstrates
exceptional capability in capturing the complex frequency tex-
tures and long-range periodicity of heart sounds. We employ
a Masked Graph Attention Network (GAT) to explicitly dis-
entangle the remaining noise from the heart sounds by mod-
eling the complex topological relationships within the embed-
dings [20]. To address the common issue of disconnected or
over-suppressed waveforms caused by mask-based separation,
a Latent Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) is applied to
seamlessly reconstruct the natural physiological structure of the
heart sound.
2. Proposed Methodology
The proposed architecture is structured into three interdepen-
dent modules. First, we use an LLM-based encoder (Whisper)
[18] to extract features from raw audio. Second, we construct a
semantic graph to feed into the Graph Attention Network (GAT)
[21] model and utilize mask-based separation [22] to separate
noise from the heart audio. Finally, we use a Latent Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) [23, 24] to restore the structural in-
tegrity of the corrupted heart sound directly within the semantic
embedding space, generating clean audio that contains all diag-
nosable features. As illustrated in Figure 1, these three stages
work sequentially to isolate the target bio-signal.
2.1. LLM-Based Bio-Acoustic Embedding
Traditional signal enhancement models heavily rely on Con-
volutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to extract features from
spectrograms. However, CNNs are inherently bounded by their
local receptive fields, making it difficult to distinguish heart
sounds from non-stationary noise when their local acoustic
properties overlap. Let the input acoustic feature sequence be
3914
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-883
Figure 1:Overall architecture of the proposed clinical heart sound separation framework, illustrating the three core modules: LLM-
based bio-acoustic embedding, Masked GAT for noise disentanglement, and Latent GAN for physiological reconstruction.
X={x 1,x 2,...,x T}. A standard CNN embeddingE CNN at
timetis computed as:
ECNN(t) =
KX
k=−K
Wkxt+k +b(1)
whereKrepresents the kernel size. The receptive field is
strictly limited toO(K). To capture a physiological depen-
dency at distanceτ(e.g., the distance between S1 and S2), a
CNN requires a depth ofO(τ/K)layers. Consequently, the
mutual informationI(E CNN(t);xt+τ )rapidly decays to zero
exponentially with distance, leading to a failure in capturing the
global physiological context. To overcome this, we utilize a
pretrained large-scale acoustic model (Whisper) based on the
self-attention mechanism. The LLM-based embeddingE LLM
is formulated as:
ELLM(t) =
TX
τ=1
Softmax
 (WQxt)⊤(WKxτ )√
d

WVxτ
(2)
Unlike CNNs, the self-attention mechanism computes a global
similarity score across the entire sequenceTwith a path length
ofO(1). This mathematically guarantees thatE LLM main-
tains a stable lower bound of non-zero mutual information
I(E LLM(t);xτ )>ϵ>0globally, allowing the network to rely
on long-range periodic cues to identify the bio-acoustic source,
even when local frames are entirely corrupted by sudden clini-
cal noise bursts.
2.2. Masked Graph Attention Network for Disentangle-
ment
To disentangle the noise from the heart sound source, we con-
struct a graphG= (V,E)where each nodev i ∈ Vcorre-
sponds to the semantic embeddingE LLM(i). A GAT learns the
complex, non-linear relationships between non-stationary noise
patterns and cardiac components. The node representation is
updated via attention coefficientsαij:
h(l+1)
i =σ

X
j∈Ni
αijWh(l)
j

 (3)
A naive approach would be to use the GAT to directly
predict the clean bio-signal representation (i.e., Direct GAT).
However, direct regression operates in an unbounded hypothe-
sis spaceH direct∈R D. Instead, we propose a Masked GAT,
which predicts a bounded maskM∈[0,1] D:
M=σ

WmH(L)

, ˜E=M⊙E LLM (4)
The theoretical superiority of the Masked GAT can be rigor-
ously proven by analyzing the hypothesis space complexity. Let
Hmask be the hypothesis space of the Masked GAT. Because
M∈[0,1], the output is strictly bounded:| ˜E| ≤ |ELLM|.
Therefore, the Rademacher complexityRof the masked space
is strictly smaller than that of the direct space (R(H mask)<
R(Hdirect)). According to statistical learning theory, the ex-
pected generalization errorE test is bounded by the empirical
training errorE train and the Rademacher complexity:
Etest≤E train + 2R(H) +O
 r
ln(1/δ)
N
!
(5)
By strictly constraining the complexity (R(H mask)), the
Masked GAT mathematically guarantees a tighter upper bound
on the generalization error, providing superior robustness
against unseen clinical noise types compared to direct estima-
tion.
2.3. Latent GAN for Physiological Embedding Reconstruc-
tion
While the Masked GAT effectively suppresses noise, the mul-
tiplicative masking inherently creates ”holes” in the embed-
ding ˜E, destroying the continuity of the latent bio-acoustic
manifold. Traditional methods attempt to apply GANs on
high-dimensional 1D waveforms or 2D spectrograms (x∈
RN,N≫10 4). However, matching the complex data distri-
butionP data and the generated distributionP g in such high-
dimensional spaces causes optimal transport costs (e.g., Wasser-
stein distance) to scale exponentially, leading to severe mode
collapse and phase mismatch. To ensure mathematical stability,
we propose a Latent GAN operating entirely within the low-
dimensional embedding space (z∈R d,d≪N). The Genera-
torGtakes the corrupted masked embedding ˜Eand reconstructs
the clean physiological embedding ˆEclean =G( ˜E). Operat-
ing in this dense latent space drastically reduces the topological
complexity. According to the Wasserstein distance formulation:
W(P clean,Pg) = sup
||D||L≤1
Ez∼Pclean [D(z)]−E ˜z∼Pmasked[D(G(˜z))]
(6)
Enforcing the 1-Lipschitz continuity constraint (||D|| L ≤1)
on the DiscriminatorDis significantly more tractable in the
low-dimensionalR d space than in the highly stochastic wave-
form space. To preserve physiological semantics, the objective
function integrates this adversarial loss with a Cosine Similarity
loss:
Lsemantic = 1−
ˆEclean·E clean ˆEclean
∥Eclean∥
(7)
Ltotal =L GAN +λL semantic (8)
By healing the signal at the embedding level, our architec-
ture circumvents the intractable optimal transport problem of
3915
Algorithm 1CLEAR Framework: Training and Inference
Input:Noisy heart sound waveformX∈R T , Clean waveform
Y∈R T
Output:Reconstructed clean waveform ˆY∈R T
Parameters:Pretrained Whisper encoderE θ, Masked GAT
Gϕ, Latent GeneratorGα, DiscriminatorDβ, Acoustic Decoder
Dγ
1:foreach training batch(X,Y)do
2:// Step 1: LLM-Based Bio-Acoustic Embedding
3:E LLM←E θ(X){Extract global semantic priors}
4:E clean←E θ(Y){Ground truth embedding}
5:// Step 2: Masked GA T Disentanglement
6:Construct semantic graphG= (V,E)fromE LLM
7:M←G ϕ(G){Predict bounded maskM∈[0,1]}
8: ˜E←M⊙E LLM{Apply multiplicative masking}
9:// Step 3: Latent GAN Reconstruction
10: ˆEclean←G α( ˜E){Heal the masked embedding}
11:// Discriminator Update
12:L D←−E[logD β(Eclean)]−E[log(1−D β( ˆEclean))]
13:Updateβto minimizeL D
14:// Generator & GA T Update
15:L semantic←1−
ˆEclean·Eclean
∥ ˆEclean∥∥Eclean∥
16:L G←−E[logD β( ˆEclean)] +λL semantic
17:Updateϕ,αto minimizeL G
18:end for
19:// Inference Phase
20:Given unseen noisy waveformX test, obtain ˆEclean through
Steps 1-3.
21: ˆY←D γ( ˆEclean){Decode to clean waveform}
22:return ˆY
high-dimensional acoustic signals, successfully restoring intrin-
sic physiological structures damaged by aggressive noise mask-
ing.
2.4. Algorithm Overview
The end-to-end training and inference procedure of the CLEAR
framework is summarized in Algorithm 1. The process begins
by extracting global semantic priors from the raw noisy wave-
form using the pretrained Whisper encoder. These sequence
embeddings are then structured into a topological graph, allow-
ing the Masked GAT to predict a bounded noise-suppression
mask. The element-wise multiplication of this mask and the
original embeddings yields a noise-filtered, albeit fragmented,
latent representation. To restore the continuous physiologi-
cal manifold, the Latent GAN is trained adversarially. The
generator heals the masked embeddings while the discrimina-
tor ensures the output distribution aligns with the ground-truth
clean embeddings, strictly regularized by a cosine similarity
semantic loss. During the inference phase, the restored em-
beddings are efficiently mapped back to the time domain via
a lightweight acoustic decoder, providing physicians with high-
fidelity, distortion-free heart sounds for accurate auscultation.
3. Experiments and Results
3.1. Dataset Construction and Noise Mixing
To validate the clinical efficacy of the proposed CLEAR frame-
work, this study utilized the BUET Multi-Disease Heart Sound
Table 1:Maximum restoration capability (peak performance)
of the proposed model on a selected optimal test sample under
10 dB SNR environmental noise.
Data Condition PESQ SI-SDR (dB)
Noisy Input 1.0304 -29.3715
Enhanced Output (Proposed) 4.6433 64.3566
Dataset. This dataset encompasses not only normal heart
sounds but also pathological heart sounds (e.g., S1, S2, and
murmurs) associated with various cardiovascular diseases. To
overcome the limitations of controlled laboratory data and rig-
orously simulate real-world clinical auscultation environments,
we constructed the input data by artificially synthesizing en-
vironmental noise with the clean heart sound recordings. The
synthesized noise comprised background conversations, med-
ical equipment operational sounds, and indoor reverberations
commonly encountered in hospitals and daily settings. Specif-
ically, to rigorously evaluate the robustness of the proposed
model, the environmental noise was mixed at a Signal-to-Noise
Ratio (SNR) of 10 dB, intentionally replicating a harsh auscul-
tation environment where critical murmurs are heavily masked
by ambient noise.
3.2. Evaluation Metrics
To comprehensively evaluate the quality of the restored heart
sounds and conduct a granular analysis of the architectural com-
ponents, we employed a diverse set of objective metrics. For
the primary assessment of clinical viability, we measured the
Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ) [25, 26] and
the Scale-Invariant Signal-to-Distortion Ratio (SI-SDR) [27] in
Wide-Band (16000 Hz) mode. Although PESQ is convention-
ally employed for human speech, we actively adopted it for
heart sound evaluation considering clinical specificity. In clin-
ical practice, detecting cardiac abnormalities ultimately relies
on the physician’s auditory perception. Conventional filtering
often generates mechanical distortions (”musical noise”) dur-
ing noise suppression, causing fatal misdiagnoses. Therefore,
PESQ is an essential metric to verify whether the framework has
reconstructed the subtle acoustic textures of heart murmurs nat-
urally and without robotic artifacts. Additionally, for the archi-
tectural ablation study, we incorporated Log-Spectral Distance
(LSD), CBAK, and COVL [28] to specifically trace spectral dis-
tortion and background suppression capabilities across different
module combinations. The interpretations of these metrics are
as follows:
• PESQ: Scores range from -0.5 to 4.5. A score<1.5indicates
severe distortion, whereas>3.5signifies excellent, highly
natural reconstruction.
• SI-SDR: A value<0dB indicates severe distortion, and
>20dB denotes exceptional, high-fidelity bio-signal sep-
aration.
• LSD: Measures the spectral distortion between the original
and reconstructed signals. A lower value indicates superior
preservation.
• CBAK & COVL: CBAK assesses the quality of background
noise suppression, while COVL represents overall signal
quality. Higher values are preferred.
3916
Table 2:Ablation study evaluating the individual contributions
of the core modules. LSD is better when lower; PESQ, CBAK,
and COVL are better when higher .
Architecture PESQ LSD CBAK COVL
CNN + GAT + GAN 1.0361 1.9339 2.1263 2.4246
Whisper + CNN + GAN 1.0274 3.5504 2.1423 2.5779
Whisper + GAT + Diff 1.0350 3.8609 2.1670 2.4655
Whisper + GA T + GAN (Proposed) 2.9958 1.7898 2.6713 3.3865
*All numerical values represent dataset averages computed via dual-input protocol.
3.3. Heart Sound Restoration Performance
Table 1 presents the performance comparison between the noisy
input signals and the enhanced output signals restored by the
proposed model. It is important to note that the values re-
ported in Table 1 represent the peak performance obtained from
the best-case individual sample evaluation, effectively showcas-
ing the maximum restoration capability of the CLEAR frame-
work under optimal inference conditions. As clearly shown, the
noisy input signal recorded a PESQ of 1.0304 and an SI-SDR
of -29.3715 dB, demonstrating severe degradation where early
diagnosis is practically impossible. In contrast, the enhanced
output signal processed through the proposed model achieved a
dramatic performance surge, reaching a peak PESQ of 4.6433
and an SI-SDR of 64.3566 dB. These results prove that our
approach—which shifts away from the simple acoustic filter-
ing paradigm by combining semantic embedding extraction us-
ing a Large Language Model (LLM) with Latent Space Recon-
struction—perfectly isolates the target bio-signal without intro-
ducing mechanical distortion. Ultimately, the proposed model
provides physicians with highly natural and clean heart sounds
even in noisy clinical environments.
3.4. Ablation Study
An ablation study was conducted to verify the individual con-
tributions and structural validity of the three core modules com-
prising the proposed CLEAR framework. Table 2 presents
the performance variations when each core module is replaced
with alternative deep learning architectures. Unlike Table 1,
which highlights peak individual performance, Table 2 reports
the mean scores averaged across the entire test dataset. Fur-
thermore, to compute the composite metrics (CBAK, COVL,
and LSD), a specific dual-signal evaluation protocol was strictly
employed, utilizing both the ground-truth clean audio and the
model’s generated output as paired reference inputs. This rig-
orous average-case evaluation protocol accounts for the nu-
merical variance between the peak PESQ in Table 1 and the
average PESQ in Table 2, providing a comprehensive view
of the model’s generalized stability. The results highlight
three key structural advantages. First, when the Whisper en-
coder was replaced with a standard CNN encoder, the PESQ
dropped precipitously. This indicates that CNNs fail to capture
the global semantic context essential for successfully restor-
ing heart sounds. Second, replacing the relational separation
module (GAT) with a CNN significantly worsened the spectral
distortion (LSD 3.5504), demonstrating that disentangling non-
stationary noise necessitates graph-based topological relation-
ship learning. Third, substituting the latent space reconstruc-
tion module (GAN) with a Diffusion model resulted in over-
all metric degradation, suggesting that diffusion models risk
causing over-smoothing or distorting delicate phase informa-
tion. Ultimately, the organic integration of semantic embed-
ding, mask-based graph attention, and adversarial latent recon-
struction proved to be the optimal architecture for recovering
heart sounds under extreme noise.
4. Discussion
This study proposed and validated the CLEAR framework, de-
signed to precisely restore heart sounds in harsh clinical en-
vironments. Utilizing the BUET Multi-Disease Heart Sound
Dataset [29], experimental results confirmed that even under a
severe 10 dB SNR environmental noise condition, the proposed
model effectively eliminated ambient noise while perfectly pre-
serving subtle pathological features such as murmurs. A pri-
mary contribution of this research is the active adoption and
justification of the PESQ metric for bio-signal evaluation. Be-
cause clinical auscultation ultimately relies on the physician’s
auditory perception, it is paramount to avoid mechanical dis-
tortions, such as ”musical noise.” Through dramatic improve-
ments in PESQ, CLEAR objectively demonstrated its capability
to achieve highly natural, physiological sound restoration free
of robotic artifacts. Furthermore, the ablation study highlighted
the limitations of relying on simple convolutional networks or
diffusion models—such as local energy dependency and phase
distortion—proving that the organic integration of LLM embed-
ding, GAT, and Latent GAN is optimal for this clinical objec-
tive. Beyond assisting human physicians, this study underscores
the critical importance of denoising for downstream automated
Computer-Aided Diagnostic (CAD) systems. When perform-
ing multi-class disease classification using deep learning mod-
els, background noise corrupts spatial and temporal latent fea-
tures, severely degrading perceptual quality and leading to false
classifications. While recent studies have proposed multi-view
attention networks [30], transformer networks [10], and spe-
cialized heart sound denoising techniques [11, 31], many still
struggle with in-band noise masking subtle murmurs. Although
fine-tuned Audio-LLMs [32] for heart murmurs have been re-
cently introduced [33], CLEAR innovates by utilizing the LLM
not just for classification, but as an embedding backbone for
mask-based graph separation and latent space restoration. This
approach guarantees that downstream diagnostic AIs receive
structurally intact and highly reliable latent features, thereby
preventing false classifications caused by environmental noise.
5. Conclusion
In conclusion, CLEAR offers a practical, high-fidelity solution
to overcome the severe acoustic limitations of real-world clin-
ical settings. By effectively filtering destructive environmental
noise, our framework safeguards the crucial pathological fea-
tures, such as murmurs, essential for multi-class disease classifi-
cation. These results validate the integration of large pretrained
models and graph attention for robust bio-acoustic source sep-
aration. With strong potential for integration into smart stetho-
scopes and telemedicine platforms, CLEAR delivers distortion-
free auditory feedback for physicians and clean representations
for diagnostic AI. Ultimately, this dual capability is expected to
significantly enhance the early detection of cardiovascular dis-
eases in highly noisy environments.
6. Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation
of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT)
(No. RS-2026-25469002) and Institute of Information & com-
munications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) (IITP-
RS-2023-00256629, IITP-2026-RS-2024-00437718), and Cul-
3917
ture, Sports and Tourism R&D Program through the Korea Cre-
ative Content Agency grant funded by the Ministry of Cul-
ture, Sports and Tourism in 2026 (Project Name: Content Il-
legal Streaming Infringement Analysis Digital Forensics Hu-
man Resource Development Center, Project Number: RS-2026-
25513329).