Shared Phone-Level Neural Representations of Auditory Perception and
‘Inner V oice’ Production: One-to-One Mapping using a Single-Subject EEG
Corpus of Heard and Imagined Natural Speech
Scott Wellington ID 1, Oliver Watts2, Damien Coyle ID 1, Benjamin Metcalfe ID 1
1 Department of Electronic & Electrical Engineering, University of Bath, UK
2 SpeakUnique Ltd, Edinburgh, UK
{sdlw20,bwm23,dhc30}@bath.ac.uk
Abstract
We present a novel paradigm that enables the collection of time-
aligned heard and imagined natural fully-connected speech, and
use it to collect over 22 hours of single-participant EEG. We
make these data publicly available. We present results of an ex-
periment that shows how these data can be used to probe the ex-
tent to which similar neural processing underlies auditory per-
ception and imagined speech production at the phonetic level.
Specifically, we demonstrate that the evoked response potentials
(ERPs) of phones elicited during imagined speech are closest in
vector space to the ERPs of the corresponding phones for heard
speech. We show that a weighted sum of different frequency
sub-bands can be calculated via convex quadratic optimisation
to improve this one-to-one mapping between heard and imag-
ined speech phones. Our findings suggest that the ‘inner voice’
has phone-level neural correlates; this can inform the direction
of research into brain-computer interfaces for imagined speech.
Index Terms: EEG, BCI, imagined speech, neural correlates
1. Introduction
The loss of natural speech due to, for instance, neurodegen-
erative conditions such as motor neurone disease (MND) is a
life-changing event that requires individuals to adopt alterna-
tive and augmentative communication (AAC) devices. For late-
stage MND, such devices may require eye-gaze tracking and
predictive text technologies. However, using these devices can
be a frustrating experience: the rate of communication is an
order of magnitude less than that afforded by healthy speech,
with advanced users able to communicate around 10–20 words
per minute [1, 2]. With recent advances in the field of biomedi-
cal engineering for invasive and non-invasive electroencephalo-
graphic (EEG) devices, and in the field of computer science for
improved deep learning methods, speech neuroprostheses are
increasingly regarded as the next generation of AACs—that is,
devices which decodeimaginedspeech into audio output.
However, the machine learning to train such devices re-
quires a lot of data. Automatic speech recognition (ASR) from
theaudiosignal requires a lot of data to create a pre-trained
model of reasonably reliable accuracy: cutting-edge models
can require many hundreds [3, 4] or thousands of hours [5]
of labelled training data. This trend is also observed in mod-
els for speech neuroprostheses that are subject-specific (trained
using a single individual’s neural data, for exclusive use by
that user) and trained using intracortical data (high-fidelity sig-
nal recorded at, or within millimetres of, the neural activity of
speech processing). For instance, Moseset al.[6] recorded
22 hours of intracortical data over 9800 trials of isolated-word
production for a single subject, while Willetet al.[7] recorded
10,850 over the course of multiple days at a rate of 260–480
sentences per day.
Importantly, invasive EEGs carry surgical risk, and may not
be a universally accessible solution for those who can bene-
fit from speech neuroprostheses. Therefore, the development
of AACs relying only on surface EEG is attractive. However,
the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of surface EEG devices is much
lower than invasive devices. On one level, this is due to in-
creased signal smearing and attenuation effects, simply due to
recording at the scalp [8, 9]. On another level, the hardware it-
self can lead to decreasing SNR; for instance, due to an increase
in impedance as electrodes begin to dry over the recording pe-
riod [10]. To compensate, even more data are required to pursue
machine learning that can effectively denoise the signal.
Finally, the production of imagined speech is a subtle neural
signal. Researchers who have compared intra-subject vocalised
speech vs. imagined speech decoding from EEG typically report
stronger machine learning performances for vocalised speech
[11, 12], which can be attributed to greater neural activity from
the motor cortex providing more signal information that aids
model training [1, 13]. However, with a dataset that is suffi-
ciently comprehensive, it is possible to model the underlying
distribution of even a subtle neural signal.
It is therefore clear that research for imagined speech-based
AACs requires large corpora of data. Regrettably, there is a
dearth of such datasets. Due to the difficulties of recruiting
a single participant to sit for repeated sessions over extended
periods, and time-on-task effects leading to increased fatigue
over successive days, it is typical to recruit multiple partici-
pants for shorter sessions. Equally, datasets for imagined speech
often comprise isolated words, which stunt any claims about
their broader application to AAC neuroprostheses for fully-
connected speech—for instance, imagined speech may encode
the same co-articulation effects as seen in vocalised speech.
To our knowledge, the longest duration of openly-available
surface EEG data that exists is Zhanget al.’s Chinese Imagined
Speech Corpus (Chisco) [14], which includes over 6 hours of
fully-connected imagined speech data for each of 3 participants.
While this is an excellent resource, research points towards im-
portant distinctions in the neural processing of tonal vs. non-
tonal languages [15, 16], which may lead to critical differences
in analyses and machine learning outcomes between the two
language families. For non-tonal languages, Valleet al.’s Large
Spanish EEG [17] addresses a need for multi-subject data at
scale, with 56 participants performing up to 210 imagined sen-
tences each. To our knowledge, however, there are presently no
publicly available datasets for surface EEG of imagined natural
sentences in non-tonal languages with a per-participant duration
above 20 minutes.
4864
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2683
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heard Speech Imagined Speech 
16.35 16.53 16.93 TIMESTAMP: 14.85 17.98 19.48 19.68 20.08 21.13 
 
Audio 
 
 
 
 
 
Video 
 
 
 
 
EEG 
COUNTDOWN 
TO IMAGINED 
SENTENCE 
COUNTDOWN 
TO PLAYED 
AUDIO 
COUNTDOWN 
TO PLAYED 
AUDIO 
TIME-ALIGNED SUBTITLES WITH AUDIO TIME-ALIGNED SUBTITLES, NO AUDIO 
64 channels 
Figure 1:The CHINS recording paradigm. The participant was fitted with a BioSemi ActiveTwo 64-channel EEG, while presented
with orated Sherlock Holmes novellas. Time-stamped examples of stimuli are shown for illustration only. Single-word visual text of the
audio stimuli were time-aligned, where a highlighted red letter within each word provides a ‘fixation point’ to minimise EOG artefacts).
To that end, we here present the Corpus of Heard and Imag-
ined Natural Speech (CHINS), which comprises over 21h 22m
of a single participant’s EEG data elicited in response to fully-
connected English sentences. We present an analysis of these
data which demonstrates that, for each of the 39 phones of
the CMU pronouncing dictionary [18], ERPs of heard phones
are closest in distance space to their corresponding imagined
phones. We posit that this reveals shared neural processing
between auditory speech perception and imagined speech pro-
duction, which may have important implications for decoding
strategies in the next generation of speech neuroprostheses.
2. Methodology
We describe here the collection of the CHINS dataset, which we
make publicly available (https://www.speakunique.
co.uk/research/CHINS). The dataset consists of heard
and imagined speech from a single subject. Figure 1 provides a
time-stamped example of the recording protocol: EEG signal is
recorded in response to audio-visual stimuli delivered by com-
puter monitor and speakers, with the participant seated comfort-
ably in a controlled, sound-dampened environment. Sentences
from fiction audiobooks [19] are played sentence-by-sentence.
Automatic alignment [20] was used to associate the speech
with the corresponding text and provide word-level timestamps.
The timings obtained in this way are used to present the text vi-
sually, word-by-word in time with the audio. After hearing the
narrated speech with the simultaneous visual prompts, there is a
short pause for preparation before the participant is required to
imagine the auditory stimulus with the exact same intonation,
cadence and prosody. The same word-by-word time-aligned
text is repeated to the participant during this phase with the
goal of ensuring that the EEG signal captured in the imagined
phase is meaningfully time-aligned with that captured during
the heard phase.
The text was presented one word at a time, overwriting the
same area of the screen in order to provide a constant ‘fixa-
tion point’ for the participant’s gaze, thereby minimising ocular
artefacts in the captured EEG signal. A simple weighting for-
mula based on word length, and biased towards the first coda
of each word was used to centrally align the text using a sin-
gle red-highlighted letter (a similar approach has been used in
speed-reading apps [21]).
EEG data were recorded using a BioSemi ActiveTwo 64-
channel EEG at 1,024 Hz, in a standard ‘64+6’ set-up (64 EEG
with 6 auxiliary channels: 2 references placed on the mas-
toid processes, 2 vertical electrooculogram (VEOG) and 2 hor-
izontal electrooculogram (HEOG) electrodes). Impedance was
monitored as below 2.5 kΩfor all channels for all recordings.
The EEG and the audio-visual stimuli were set to be clock-
synced via ‘trigger pulses’ coordinated via the OpenSesame ap-
plication [22].
To aid and sanity-check synchronisation of the EEG record-
ing and the audio stimulus, a beep at 4,410 Hz was played ran-
domly within the first and last minute of each recording; this
beep was purposefully loud and unpredictable, with the aim
of eliciting an evoked ‘discomfort’ response (specifically an
AEP response, as outlined in Khalighinejadet al.[23]) in the
EEG signal. Each recording was approximately∼20 minutes in
length, to prevent fatigue. Accounting for preparatory pauses,
the total recording time of these single-subject data is>10.5 hrs
for auditory speech, and>10.5 hrs for imagined speech.
The participant is ‘expert-informed’, having administered
EEG trials and conducted research into imagined speech. The
participant is therefore well-informed of the differences be-
tweeninnerandimaginedspeech (Nietoet al.[24] provide
an excellent summary), and therefore did not require special
training to elicit the desired neural signal forimaginedspeech
specifically. Equally, the participant is invested in the research,
meaning that proper focus was given and great care was taken
to avoid fatigue effects.
2.1. Distance between ERPs of heard and imagined phones
The raw EEG data were first re-referenced using auxiliary refer-
ence channels, before applying a notch filter at 50 Hz to remove
line noise. To improve the stability of independent component
analysis (ICA) for zeroing-out signal components related to oc-
ular artefacts (blinks and saccades), a 1 Hz high-pass filter was
applied to ensure the removal of slow wave components and
baseline drift. ICA was then fitted to the data using the dedi-
cated VEOG and HEOG channels. EOG components to zero-
out were determined algorithmically using MNE-Python [25]
default parameters for iterative z-scoring. No further clean-
ing or artefact removal was performed. All available data were
used; no trials were discarded.
We bandpass filter the data into 18 frequency sub-bands of
interest using a fourth-order Butterworth IIR filter, applied with
zero-phase forward–backward filtering to avoid phase distor-
tion. The 18 sub-bands include conventional frequency ranges
4865
 
 ERPs of heard (hrd) and imagined (img) vowels (channel P7) 
EXTRACTED WINDOW 
—— [ʌ] (hrd) 
------ [ʌ] (img) 
—— [ɪ] (hrd) 
------ [ɪ] (img) 
—— [i:] (hrd) 
------ [i:] (img) 
—— [ɛ] (hrd) 
------ [ɛ] (img) 
—— [æ] (hrd) 
------ [æ] (img) 
 
𝑛 = 23,256 
𝑛 = 23,236 
𝑛 = 15,584 
𝑛 = 15,509 
𝑛 = 8,363 
𝑛 = 8,318 
𝑛 = 6,895 
𝑛 = 6,866 
𝑛 = 6,174 
𝑛 = 6,139 
 
—— [t] (hrd) 
------ [t] (img) 
—— [n] (hrd) 
------ [n] (img) 
—— [d] (hrd) 
------ [d] (img) 
—— [s] (hrd) 
------ [s] (img) 
—— [ɹ] (hrd) 
------ [ɹ] (img) 
 
𝑛 = 16,810 
𝑛 = 16,713 
𝑛 = 16,242 
𝑛 = 16,158 
𝑛 = 10,942 
𝑛 = 10,901 
𝑛 = 10,729 
𝑛 = 10,682 
𝑛 = 9,224 
𝑛 = 9,191 
 
ERPs of heard (hrd) and imagined (img) consonants (channel P7) 
-0.6 
-0.4 
-0.2 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
-0.4 
-0.2 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
MAGNITUDE (1𝑒−7) 
MAGNITUDE (1𝑒−7) 
-0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 -0.11 TIME (seconds) 
Figure 2:ERPs of vowels (CMU dictionary: AA [2], IH [I], IY [i:], EH [E], AE [æ]) and consonants (CMU dictionary: T [t], N [n], D
[d], S [s], R [ô]) -0.2 seconds pre-onset to 0.8 seconds post-onset, with sizenof each class, and extracted window from -0.11 s to 0.4 s.
(delta, theta, alpha,etc.) and unconventional ranges (e.g. 50
Hz–100 Hz), chosen to extend the analysis of phone-related in-
formation across broader and less-studied spectral ranges. The
upper and lower bounds of each are omitted here for brevity, but
details can be found in the CHINS data repository.
To ensure that we capture all relevant signal information,
we first partition these data into overly-long−0.5spre-onset
to1.0spost-onset epochs, and for each EEG channel calcu-
late the ERPs from each of the sub-bands, from which we later
identify the optimal analysis window to extract. Despite averag-
ing across thousands of exemplars, ERP waveforms still exhibit
noise particularly in the higher frequencies. To reduce noise,
we therefore apply a Savitzky-Golay filter to smooth the ERP
data, which preserves high-frequency signal components like
peak heights and widths better than moving average filters. We
jointly identify the optimal Savitzky–Golay window size and
ERP analysis window by minimising an objective function de-
fined as the summed Canberra distance for each imagined phone
and its corresponding heard phone, where each EEG channel
contributes a Savitzky–Golay-smoothed ERP waveform with
window sizeT, and each phone-pair distance is the mean Can-
berra distance over homologous channels, summed across sub-
bands. Unlike Euclidean distance measures, Canberra nor-
malises each dimension by the magnitude of the compared val-
ues, which emphasisesproportionaldeviations across the ERP
waveform while reducing the influence of large-amplitude com-
ponents [26]. The Canberra metric therefore captures rela-
 
 
 
 
 
[ɒ] auditory [ɒ] imagined Canberra distance 
t = 0.36 s t = 0.36 s 
300 
150 
225 
375 
75 d µV µV 
0.2 
0.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
-0.2 
-0.4 
0.4 
-0.2 
-0.4 
t = -0.11 s – 0.4 s 
Figure 3:Topological maps of the [6] phone (CMUdict ‘AA’,
n=3506), where timetis the P300 signal component at its high-
est magnitude jointly for the heard [left] and imagined [centre]
ERPs, and a topological heatmap [right] of the Canberra dis-
tance between the two ERPs for each of the 64 EEG channels,
using our pre- and post-onset Savitzky–Golay filtered window.
tive differences in ERP morphology, which is more informative
than simply measuring amplitude variation when comparing be-
tween heard and imagined ERPs. Figure 2 shows our calculated
optimal ERP window to extract, illustrating 5 vowels and con-
sonants for heard and imagined phones, with data filtered using
only a 1 Hz high-pass and Savitzky–Golay smoothing. Figure
3 shows topological maps for one vowel, and a corresponding
heatmap of the resultant per-channel Canberra distances.
Using the above operation, we achieve a one-to-one map-
ping between each imagined phone and its corresponding heard
phone for CHINS data. To clarify: channel-wise distances are
first computed between each imagined ERP and each heard
ERP, and then summed across sub-bands, producing a symmet-
ric distance matrix whose minimal values lie on the diagonal.
Finally, we optimise this one-to-one mapping by solving
a convex quadratic optimisation problem over a set of tensor
weights that determine how the sub-band distance matrices are
combined into a single effective distance matrix. The objec-
tive minimises the weighted sum of diagonal distances with
L2 regularisation, while linear constraints enforce permutation-
like structure by requiring each diagonal element to be non-
negative (to ensure distances remain positive and interpretable)
and no larger than any other element in its row (so that each
imagined phone is minimally distant to its corresponding heard
phone). To improve convergence, we first solve a differentiable
relaxation of these constraints using smooth approximations
of the inequality constraints and an annealing schedule, op-
timised with the Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS)
algorithm [27]. The resulting solution is then refined using a
hard-constrained solver that enforces the linear constraints di-
rectly. The optimisation usedλ= 0.01, penalty weight= 100,
α= 0.5,β= 0.5, four annealing steps, and an annealing factor
of 2. Improvement to the one-to-one mapping is quantified by
the separation ratio, which increases relative to the unweighted
baseline by a factor of 3.37.
3. Results and Discussion
Figure 4 shows the results for hierarchical clustering of the sum
of weighted ERP distances between imagined phones and heard
phones. Table 1 provides a breakdown of the phonetic clusters.
Our analysis suggests that the neural correlates of imagined
speech production are measurably aligned with the correlates
of auditory speech perception at the phonetic level. This find-
4866
 
 
 
 
Heard phones 
HEARD PHONES 
IMAGINED PHONES 
∑ 𝑤𝑖𝑑𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑎(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖)
𝑁
𝑖=1
 
IMAGINED PHONES 
IMAGINED PHONES 
HEARD PHONES 
HEARD PHONES 
Figure 4:Hierarchical clustering heatmaps of the sum of weighted ERP distances for between-modality imagined phones and heard
phones [left] and within-modality imagined phones [right, upper triangle of its symmetric matrix] and heard phones [right, lower
triangle of its symmetric matrix]. Clusters were calculated using the Ward variance minimization algorithm. To remove noise and aid
visibility, phones [OI] and [Z] have been removed due to being rarely-occurring in the CHINS data (n= 350 and 75, respectively).
ing reinforces similar fMRI research for heard and imagined
speech processing; for example, Luet al.[28] report that con-
tinuous auditory speech perception and imagined speech pro-
duction rely on shared cortical mechanisms within the sensori-
motor cortex, Broca’s area and the auditory cortex.
Research from Khalighinejadet al.[23] has previously
demonstrated that the EEG of heard continuous speech, anal-
ysed at the phone-level, exhibits ERPs with Euclidean distance-
based hierarchical clusters that are characterised by phonologi-
cal natural classes: first, by obstruents and sonorants (one level
below the dendrogram root), then by manner of articulation
(two levels below the dendrogram root), grouped (broadly) as
(1) vowels, (2) nasals and liquids, (3) approximants and plo-
sives, and (4) fricatives. Hierarchical clustering of the ERP
distances between CHINS imagined and heard phones also re-
veals four distinct groups characterised by shared phonological
features. Table 1 provides these clusters two levels below the
dendrogram root, grouped (broadly) as (1) vowels, (2) alveolar
nasals, plosives and approximants (3) bilabial and velar nasals,
plosives and approximants, and (4) fricatives. While Khaligh-
inejadet al.report that the ERP distances of heard phones clus-
Table 1:The four between-modality clusters (Cl.), using Ward’s
method, for imagined (Img) and heard (Hrd) phones (per Fig-
ure 4 [left]: the four clusters (blue regions) that are two levels
below the dendrogram root), with intersections and differences.
Cl. Img−Hrd Img∩Hrd Hrd−Img
1 aU, eI, @U, 6, æ, O:, E, U aI, u:
2 aI, u: t, d, tS, z, n, N, l, ô, i:, 3:
3 I, dZ w, j, p, b, m, s, S, k, g, h, f
4 2, T, D, v I, dZ
ter according to placement of articulation in lower levels of the
hierarchy, our results for both within-modality and between-
modality phones show that placement of articulation charac-
terises clusters as a higher-level distinctive feature. Full results
can be found in our data repository (URL in §2, above).
Stable one-to-one phonetic correspondence between heard
and imagined ERPs points towards the viability of transfer
and pre-training strategies for machine learning: if these two
modalities have shared signal morphology, then neural activ-
ity recorded during auditory perception can provide a useful
scaffold for training imagined speech decoders. In other words,
models trained on large-scale heard speech EEG may initialise
or regularise decoders for imagined speech, particularly when
structured by phonological clusters (e.g. cluster-specific de-
coders). However, it is important to note that the CHINS pro-
tocol is designed to elicit covert speech production processes
associated with the phonological loop [29]. EEG signal of
imagined speech phases therefore captures active articulatory
rehearsal and phonological planning, rather than only passive
recall of recently heard stimuli. Although these processes may
share phonological representations with auditory perception,
they likely recruit partially distinct neural mechanisms, which
is an important consideration for transfer-learning approaches.
4. Conclusion
CHINS contributes to an emerging need for large-scale datasets
of fully-connected, natural speech in imagined speech research.
Our analysis reveals that the neural correlates of heard and
imagined speech are aligned at the phonetic level, affording a
one-to-one mapping between each imagined phone and its cor-
responding heard phone. These data and analyses may funda-
mentally inform the next generation of speech neuroprostheses.
4867
5. Acknowledgments
This research was supported by funding from the United King-
dom Research Institute (UKRI; grant EP/S023437/1).
We extend our deepest thanks to Jonathan Clayton of the
University of Sheffield, Professor Simon King of the University
of Edinburgh, and Alice Smith of SpeakUnique Ltd, for their
support in enabling this research.
This research also made use of Hex, the GPU Cloud in the
Department of Computer Science at the University of Bath, and
we thank Dr Tom Fincham Haines for his support with it.
The Interspeech 2026 organisers would like to thank ISCA
and the organising committees of past Interspeech conferences
for their help and for kindly providing the previous version of
this template.
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI was used to aid the technical accuracy of the
paragraph in §2.1 which explains the convex quadratic optimi-
sation operation used in this research. The authors reviewed and
edited this paragraph for clarity, and take full responsibility for
its content and inclusion, and any technical inaccuracy arising
therefore. Generative AI was not used in the production of any
other part of this paper.