Addressing Random Spatial Translations in Measured Microphone Directional
Responses by Maximizing Finite Order Energy
Xue Wen ID
Samsung R&D Institute China-Beijing
xue.wen@samsung.com
Abstract
Directional responses measured on real-world devices are
disturbed by unknown translations in space, which add uncer-
tainty to spatial signal processing methods that use such data. In
this paper we propose the concept of finite order centroid, which
is the translation that maximizes directional response energy in
finite order spatial harmonics. The centroid is calculated from
the measured response as a second translation, to the effect that
it cancels any random perturbation to the first. This leads to a
calibrated directional response that is free from said position-
ing uncertainty, and has spatio-acoustical guarantees useful for
downstream processing. We use several simple tasks to show
the use of finite order centroids in spatial signal processing.
Index Terms: spatial audio, microphones, directional transfer
function, spherical harmonics, ambisonics, HRTF
1. Introduction
Recent market growth in virtual and augmented reality has
boosted interest in consumer grade spatial audio technology
[1, 2, 3, 4]. Oftentimes the device of interest has several mi-
crophones in an irregular, non-symmetric arrangement [5, 6, 7].
Developing and deploying spatial audio techniques with such
devices require knowing their acoustical directivity, often in the
form of directional transfer functions (DTF) [8, 9]. A practical
way to acquire this data is by measuring it in anechoic condi-
tion [10, 11]. The measurement is always made relative to a
reference centre in space, although what “centre” means for an
irregular device is rarely mentioned. In fact, a user of the DTF
may not even know where the centre is in the device’s physical
layout.
However, translating the reference centre of measurement
in space do change the DTF, and consequently the behaviour of
audio processing methods that use it. It is reasonable to suspect
that some centres work better than others for certain tasks. This
motivates us to look for a plausible centre that works well in a
good range of applications. In this paper we propose a class of
centres derived by maximizing the energy up to a given spatial
harmonic order. We call them finite order centroids.
2. Background
We limit our discussion to distance-independent DTFs, which
depend on a source’s direction but not its distance to the ref-
erence centre. This is the most common format of measured
DTFs in practice, and approximates physical reality under the
plane wave model of sound fields.
Directions. A directionΩmay be represented by a pair of
angles (azimuth and colatitude)(ϕ,ϑ)∈[0,2π]×[0,π], or by
a unit vector ˆk∈R 3 (see Figure 1). The set of all directions is
Figure 1:Direction in 3D
denotedS 2, formally the unit sphere ofR 3. We’ll be using the
notationsΩ,(ϕ,ϑ)and ˆkinterchangeably.
Plane wave model. The plane wave model [12] describes
a sound field as a set of plane waves from all directions:
s(r,k) =s(k)e jk·r,r∈R 3 be an arbitrary point in space,
k=k ˆk∈R 3 be a wave vector,k= 2πf/cthe wave number,
ˆkthe impinging direction, andcthe speech of sound. Notice
this is a frequency domain formula. The total sound field atr
is the integral over ˆkandf. At the reference centrer=0
we haves(k) =s(f,Ω).s(k)fully specifies a sound field
under the plane wave model, placing a source with spectrum
sΩ(f) :=s(f,Ω)in each directionΩ. We use the notation
F(S2)for the set of functions onS 2, including generalized
functions whose values are vectors or functions.s(k)is in
F(S2)since we can writes(f,Ω) : Ω ′7→s Ω′(f).
Directional response. A directional transfer function (DTF)
has the formh(k) =h(f,Ω). A microphone with DTFh(f,Ω)
in sound fields(f,Ω)outputsm(f) =
R
s(f,Ω)h(f,Ω)dΩ.
Obviouslyh(k)∈F(S 2). The head-related transfer function
(HRTF) [10] is a familiar example of array DTF, with two ear
mics baffled by the human head.
Spherical harmonics(SpH). Functions inF(S 2)can be ex-
panded as weighted sums of real special functions called spher-
ical harmonics [13], denotedY l,m(Ω),l= 0,1,2,...;m=
−l,...,l.landmare theorderand degree ofY l,m, respec-
tively. There are(L+ 1) 2 harmonics in orders up toL. Spher-
ical harmonics form an orthonormal basis ofF(S 2), hence the
SpH expansion preserves energy. In addition, energy in each
order is preserved under spatial rotation. Higher SpH orders
are related to finer spatial details, so that a SpH expansion with
more high order energy is often regarded as being spatially
more complex. SpH expansions are widely used in spatial audio
[14, 15, 16]. Notably, ambisonics [17] is based on a hypothetic
array of coincident microphones whose DTFs are spherical har-
monics.
Translation. Translating a microphone in space [18] byr
is equivalent to translating the sound field by−r, in the sense
6709
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-149
that they have the same effect on the captured signal. Under
the plane wave model the effect is a direction-dependent linear
phasee−jk·r. Given two DTFsh 1 andh 2, we sayh 1 trans-
lates toh 2 ifh 2(k) =e −jk·rh1(k)for some constantr. It
is trivial to verify this “translate-to” is an equivalence relation,
with associated equivalence class{h(k)e−jk·r|r∈R 3}. This
represents a DTF with indeterminate translation.
Unlike rotation that preserves energy in each order, transla-
tion preserves the total energy but redistributes it among differ-
ent orders. This undermines the common notion that higher or-
ders be related to higher spatial complexity, and challenges sig-
nal processing methods based on such notion. It is particularly
relevant to DTFs measured from irregular mic arrays, where
both physical asymmetry and measurement process add uncer-
tainty as to the “right” placement of the reference centre. We
propose to resolve this uncertainty by finding a translation that
upholds the said notion, thereby the signal processing methods
in question.
3. Finite order centroids
Consider the truncation of a SpH expansion to finite order,
which is common in spatial signal processing. The truncation
error is the total energy beyond the finite order. Leth(k)be a
DTF with translation class{h(k)e −jk·r|r∈R 3}. We write
down the SpH expansion
h(k)e−jk·r =
X
l,m
hl,m(k,r)Yl,m(ˆk).(1)
The finite order energy ratio (FOER) up to orderLis
J(r;h,L) =
P
l≤L,m
R
|hl,m(k,r)| 2dfRR
|h(f,Ω)| 2dfdΩ ,(2)
whereh(f,Ω)is just another spelling ofh(k). We define the
Lth finite order centroid (FOC) ofhas the maximum of (2):
ˇrL(h) := arg max
r
J(r;h,L).(3)
This minimizes the trunction error by energy preservation.
3.1. Interpretation
Finite order processing is a prominent example of a spatial au-
dio technique threatened by DTF translation: how can one dis-
card higher SpH orders that may contain significant energy due
to unknown translation? By minimizing the higher order energy
FOC gives a “counter-translation” that makes the higher orders
most disposable, thereby puts finite order processing on more
plausible ground.
FOC is based purely on acoustical data. Numerical value of
the FOC is relative to the reference centre ofh(k). While the
reference centre is often empirically chosen and approximately
implemented in a measurement setup, the FOC is inherent to a
device’s acoustics regardless of physical geometry. Translating
the reference centre to the FOC removes any uncertainty in the
DTF due to the choice or implementation of the centre.
3.2. Properties
Translation invariance. Lethbe a DTF andh ′ be obtained
by translating its reference centre by∆r, i.e.h ′(k) =
e−jk·∆rh(k), then ˇr(h′) = ˇr(h)−∆r. “Invariance” here refers
to the FOC in world coordinates, which isO+r,Obeing the
reference centre, remains constant under translation ofO.
Relation to physical position. If a DTFhhas all energy
within orderLthen ˇrL(h) =0. In addition, let DTFh ′ be
obtained by moving devicehbyr ′ (= translating its reference
centre by−r′) thenˇrL(h′) =r′. In practice many microphones
are manufactured to be omnidirectional (0th order) or of the car-
dioid family (1 st order), so we expect high finite order energy
in the DTF centred at the physical location, and the FOC to be
nearby. Getting away from this neighbourhood causes energy
to move to higher orders, an example ofspatial aliasing.
3.3. Calculation
Given DTFhand finite orderL, theL th order FOC is calcu-
lated by solving the optimization problem (3). Here we discuss
some specifics for DTFs measured on a discrete spherical grid
g:={(ϕ i,ϑj)|i= 1,...,N I;j= 1,...,N J}. There are
quadrature rules for assigning weights(w ij)to elements ofg
such that for spatially smooth functionsh∈F(S 2)we haveR
h(Ω)dΩ≈ 4π
NINJ
P
ijwijh(ϕi,ϑj). For uniformly spaced
(ϕi)and(ϑ j)a simple rule isw ij← π
2 sinϑj.
Spatial sampling density. Due to spatial discretization we
can only calculate a unique SpH expansion over a subset of rep-
resentative harmonics, no more than spatial samples. Energy of
all other harmonics are aliased onto these representatives. For
adequate evaluation of energy up to orderL, we needN I and
NJ to be substantially larger thanL, so that the aliasing error
thins out to many representatives.
Energy calculation. Spherical harmonics sampled on a grid
do not automatically form an orthonormal basis, so we apply
explicit orthogonalization to calculate finite order energy. Let
Y∈R NINJ×(L+1)2
be the SpH basis up to orderLsampled
ong, andW∈R NINJ×NINJ be a diagonal matrix of quadra-
ture weights assigned tog. We factorizeW 1/2Y=QRsuch
thatQhas orthonormal columns andRis upper triangular. The
orthogonalized basis is then ¯Y:=W −1/2Q, which satisfies
¯Y⊤W ¯Y=I. Given a discrete-space DTFH∈C NINJ×K
ong,Kbe the number of frequency bins, the orthogonalized
expansion isH≤L = ¯YC,C=Q ⊤W 1/2H. The energy in
harmonic ¯Yl,m and frequency binkis then|C l2+l+m,k|2.
Regularization. We observe that energy exchange during
optimization is weaker in the higher orders. As L gets larger the
objectiveJ(r;·)becomes flatter on global scale, allowing local
maxima to dominate the landscape and make FOC results noisy.
We address this by weighting the energy in different orders by
factor(1+l)−β, whereβis a small number (typical value 0.01).
This keeps the objective responsive to net energy flows across
allL+ 1order boundaries, which stabilizes the result.
Scheduled optimization. The objectiveJ(r;·)becomes
spatially volatile in high frequencies due to short wavelengths,
which is unhelpful to the search for FOC. We use a scheduled
procedure in which the FOC is first searched unconstrained for
a narrow band up to somefc, then searched again using the full
band within radiusαc/fc from the initial result, whereα≳0.5.
We observe that combining the two-stage schedule with regular-
ization already give stable and consistent results across a wide
range of off-the-shelf optimizers [19].
3.4. Variants
FOC in 2D directivity. Spatial harmonics in 2D are1,sinlϕ
andcoslϕ,l∈Z +. 2D spatial harmonic expansion is no other
than the Fourier series. FOC in 2D is defined by adapting (2) to
the 2D setup, withΩreplaced byϕ. The harmonics remain or-
thogonal on a uniform grid, making energy calculation simpler.
6710
Figure 2:Finite order centroids of Galaxy S24+
Figure 3:Finite order centroids of the EasyCom glasses
FOC of microphone array. The uncertain translation issue
is also relevant to mic arrays. We seek to define an acoustical
centroid for a mic array by minimizing finite order truncation er-
rors of all microphones. Let their DTFs beh 1(k),...,h M(k).
A plausible criterion for the FOC is
ˇrL(h1,...,M) = arg max
r
min
i
J(r;hi,L).(4)
Eq.(4) seeks to maximize the lowest finite order energy of all
mics. For stable estimation using (4) we calculate the objective
J(r;·)from a low frequency range whose wavelengths are not
much smaller than the array’s physical dimension.
3.5. Examples
We made in-house DTF measurements for a Samsung Galaxy
S24+ mobile phone in 2D and 3D setups, using the geometric
centre as reference point. Figure 2 shows the FOCs estimated
with ordersL= 1∼5against the device’s outline, for indi-
vidual mics (seen on left and right) as well as the whole 3-mic
array (centre). The mic FOCs are observed to cluster near the
physical mics, and the array FOCs cluster near the physical cen-
tre. We see a consistent shift in+Ydirection in the 2D result,
which indicates a positioning bias during measurement.
For an example using publicly available data we calculate
FOCs for the wearable device in the EasyCom dataset [20]. We
plot in Figure 3 (right) the FOCs averaged over orders1∼5
against a rough guess of the glasses’ physical layout. The result
suggests that microphone 1⃝ had been placed more to the back
than shown in the dataset image (left), and that the arms had
been opened wider than the frame front during measurement
(or at least acoustically so).
4. Example use cases
Finite order centroids are acoustically grounded reference cen-
tres in space, readily applicable where such a centre is needed.
It may either replace an incumbent counterpart with added guar-
antee on finite order energy, or enable a previously inapplicable
technique for want of a reference centre. In the following we
describe a few scenarios that make use of FOCs. Please no-
tice these scenarios are intended for showing the usage and be-
haviour of FOCs, rather than attaining competitive results on
specific tasks.
4.1. Interpolation and smoothing
Interpolation and smoothing create continuous representations
of functions from values observed at discrete points (“knots”).
Interpolation preserves values at knots, while smoothing relaxes
(a) S24+, interpolation
 (b) S24+, smoothing
(c) EasyCom, interpolation
 (d) EasyCom, smoothing
(e) ITA HRTF #1, interpolation
 (f) ITA HRTF #1, smoothing
Figure 4:Interpolation and smoothing of DTFs with FOC
the equality constraint in a bet for better generalization to unob-
served points. Here we show the use of FOC in linear interpo-
lation and finite order smoothing of DTFs.
Let the set of knots be the spatial gridg, and values of
functionh(Ω)observed ongbeh| g. Linear interpolation
maps(g,h| g)to a piecewise linear function ¯h(Ω)such that
¯h|g =h| g;L th-order smoothing maps the same to ˜h(Ω) =P
l≤L,m
˜hl,mYl,m(Ω)such that ˜h|g approximatesh|g by least
square. Both operators work better on smoother functions, so
we expect improved accuracy by maximizing finite order en-
ergy. To this end we calculate FOC ˇrfrom(g,h| g), translate
h|g by ˇrbefore interpolation or smoothing, then translate their
output back by− ˇr.
Figure 4 shows the results for S24+, EasyCom [20], and
a DIR from the ITA HRTF dataset [21], as relative square er-
rors against frequency. For each array the input is on a grid
withN I = 18,N J = 9. FOCs withL= 1is used in all
cases. We calculate errors from off-grid positions for interpo-
lation, and from all positions for smoothing. The solid/dashed
curves are calculated with/without FOC-based translations, re-
spectively. The 6 channels of the EasyCom device are grouped
into left(2), middle(1) and right(3) for visual clarity. We see that
FOC-based translations can improve accuracy in all three mic
arrays, although the exact behaviour differs between arrays.
4.2. Direction-aware ambisonic encoding
Ambisonic encoding [6, 9, 22] converts a recording of a sound
field by a real mic array to one captured by an ideal am-
bisonic array, whose directional responses are spherical har-
monics. A major factor that limits encoding quality is spatial
aliasing [23, 24] of the mic array. While translating one mi-
crophone can often reduce its own spatial aliasing, the benefit
is much smaller on a rigid mic array, as individual mics rarely
share a common FOC. However, for plane waves with known
impinging direction ˆk, the spatial aliasing may be improved in-
dividually by translating both microphone and recording.
Let the DTF and FOC of thei th microphone beh i(k)and
ˇri, respectively, and let the signal captured bemi(f). We trans-
late bothh i(k)andm i(f)by ˇri:h ′
i(k)←h i(k)e−jk·ˇri,
m′
i(f)←m i(f)e−j(2πf/c) ˆk·ˇri, such thatm ′
i(f)is the same
6711
(a) S24+
(b) EasyCom glasses
(c) Røde NT-SF1
Figure 5:Direction-aware ambisonic encoding of impulses
plane wave captured byh ′
i(k). The translation maximizes fi-
nite order energy inh ′
i(k)therefore reduces spatial aliasing.
We repeat the above for all microphones, then perform encod-
ing using the translated DTFs and microphone signals.
Figure 5 shows encoding performance using the linear least
square encoder [25], whose behaviour is fully characterized by
its output to directional impulses. The mic arrays tested include
S24+, EasyCom [20], and Røde NT-SF1 whose DTF we also
measured in an anechoic chamber. We compare the results to
ideal first order ambisonic recording of the same impulses, and
report spatial correlation coefficient (left column, higher is bet-
ter) and spectral magnitude difference (right, lower is better)
as metrics for directivity and sound quality (EQ), respectively.
Results are evaluated at four error levels (0, solid; 5°, 10°, 20°,
dash-dotted) of ˆkto simulate inaccurate knowledge of the im-
pinging direction. Improved scores are observed for direction
errors up to 10°in most cases, except for the EQ metric on Easy-
Com glasses. While the experiment only deals with the most
basic cases, the results show the potential of FOC-based pro-
cessing in reducing spatial aliasing, when applicable.
4.3. Analysis and calibration of measured DTFs
DTFs measured from real devices can carry indeterminate trans-
lations despite careful control. Since FOCs are invariant to
translation, they can be a useful tool for analysing uncertain
translations, and for calibrating against such.
Figure 6(a) shows temporal centroids (a proxy to relative
delay) of a DTF from the ITA HRTF dataset [21]. Each curve
plots the centroid against azimuthϕfor one fixed colatitude
ϑ. Left and right channels are marked by colour. The left
channel is observed to have smaller variation in delays than
the right channel, at odds with expected sagittal symmetry of
the human head. Using Eq.4 we calculate the array FOC to be
(−2.1cm,−2.1cm,2.8cm)forL= 1, so the reference centre
was to the left of the FOC. By translating the centre to the FOC
we obtain a new HRTF whose delay pattern is plotted in Fig-
ure 6(b). The calibrated HRTF shows improved sagittal sym-
metry, a result of Eq.(4) being symmetric with respect to micro-
phones.
To study the extent of translation uncertainty in measured
DTFs, we calculate 1 st- and 3 rd-order FOCs for HRTFs in the
(a) Original
 (b) Translated by array FOC
Figure 6:Delay patterns of a DTF (ITA HRTF , #29)
(a) ITH HRTF (b) 3D3A HRTF
Figure 7:Distribution of FOCs in two HRTF datasets
ITA [21] and 3D3A [26] HRTF datasets, and plot the positions
in Figure 7. The standard deviations are between10∼30mm
in each dimension. The range of FOC distribution is similar be-
tween the two datasets, except that the ITA dataset has larger
variation down the X axis, corresponding to the front-back di-
rection.
5. Discussion
We’ve mentioned that the FOC of a microphone is likely to be
close to the physical position. Indeed some use cases of FOC
can still be effective when using the physical position instead
[27]. Being acoustically grounded, FOCs are free from ge-
ometrical and mechanical concerns of physical microphones,
hence more friendly to signal-side calculation. FOC becomes
the more important if the physical position is uncertain, if the
microphone deviates from the norm of low spatial complexity,
or if the gap between the two makes a notable difference, such
as in Figure 6.
On the other hand, issues with directivity can arise for many
reasons, uncertain translation being just one of them. The power
of FOC is limited to translation. The best reasonable hope in
facing a complex task is for FOC-based processing to address
uncertainty in the translation of DTFs, leaving a less complex
job to be handled by other techniques.
We mention a few more potential use cases of FOC with-
out validation. (1) Estimate physical microphone positions; (2)
assess spatial quality of microphones by maximum FOER, (3)
compare or compress DTFs with FOC normalization; (4) de-
sign, construct, and calibrate mic arrays with FOC-based posi-
tioning; (5) normalize or augment DTF or DTF-derived data in
data-driven spatial audio methods.
6712
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
No generative AI has been used in producing this manuscript.