Can deep learning based voice editing enhance voice quality perception skills
in speech therapy students?
Jana Wiechmann ID 1,∗∗, Frederik Rautenberg ID 2, Reinhold Haeb-Umbach ID 2, Petra Wagner ID 1
1 Phonetics Work Group, Faculty of Linguistics and Literary Studies, Bielefeld University, Germany
2 Department of Communications Engineering, Paderborn University, Germany
{jana.wiechmann, petra.wagner}@uni-bielefeld.de,{rautenberg, haeb}@nt.uni-paderborn.de
Abstract
The perceptual assessment of voice quality remains a chal-
lenging task, especially concerning reliability and accuracy.
With novel deep learning technologies, new possibilities have
emerged for editing voice quality. In our study, we used artifi-
cially generated speech as a tool to explain voice characteristics
to speech therapy students. Twenty participants rated 16 voices
along three voice characteristics (creaky, breathy, and rough)
before and after an explanation. A control group listened to nat-
ural anchor voices during the explanation, while the other group
received synthesized samples. The synthesis-based explanation
increased perceptual sensitivity and agreement with the gold
standard, whereas no such effect was observed for the control
group. The sensitivity for ‘rough’ improved from below-chance
to above-chance only in the synthesis condition. These results
suggest that deep learning based voice editing adds a valuable
contribution to perception training in applied settings.
Index Terms: voice quality, auditory-perceptual voice assess-
ment, student training, voice editing, voice manipulation
1. Introduction
Perceptual voice quality ratings are known to be challenging,
even for experts, and a consistent and reliable classification is
difficult to achieve [1, 2, 3]. In applied fields, like speech ther-
apy or forensic phonetics, voice quality descriptions based on
predefined descriptive terms remain widely used. However, the
above-mentioned challenges in their classification become es-
pecially problematic for novices, such as speech therapists in
training [4, 5, 6, 7].
The above-mentioned difficulties in voice quality assess-
ments are often described as a result of the multidimensional
nature of voices: a single voice can be characterized by over-
lapping acoustic and perceptual voice quality dimensions that
are difficult to disentangle [8, 9]. Furthermore, there is often no
unified agreement on the meaning or interpretation of specific
terms, leading to a variability in judgments due to differing in-
ternal standards across listeners [10, 11, 1]. Perceptual voice
quality assessments are also cognitively demanding, as listen-
ers must attend to multiple acoustic-perceptual features simul-
taneously. As a possible solution, simplified tools have been
proposed for common rating assessments [12]. Furthermore,
previous research has suggested listener training with prototyp-
ical or anchor voices, which is widely used in voice assess-
ment studies, e.g. [1, 5, 10]. Such training can improve con-
sistency, although methods, scales, and outcomes vary across
studies [13, 14]. Certain voice characteristics, such as rough-
ness, have been found to be particularly difficult and unreliable
**indicates the corresponding author.
to rate [8, 15, 7].
A major limitation of existing approaches is that natural an-
chor voices are inherently multidimensional by nature as well.
For example, a voice is never characterized by one feature
alone, e.g., a voice may be ‘bright’, but may simultaneously
also be ‘high’ or ‘breathy’. There are various combinations
possible in just one voice. Listeners can thus never experience,
and scientists can also rarely isolate, a single perceptual fea-
ture. While synthetic speech has been used for a while to ma-
nipulate voice features, e.g., [16, 17, 10], only recently have
deep-learning-based systems allowed for the isolated modifi-
cation of voice characteristics with a convincingly human-like
quality [18, 19, 20, 21].
In the present study, we employ a state-of-the-art speech
synthesis system to generate voices, with three voice character-
istics being isolated and modified in strength:breathy, creaky,
and rough. We directly compare these controlled synthetic ex-
amples to natural voice examples as part of short expert expla-
nations, to examine whether isolating a single perceptual di-
mension can indeed improve perceptual voice quality ratings
by speech therapists in training.
By presenting voice characteristics in isolation, we aim to
reduce the multidimensional character of voices – which nat-
ural speech cannot provide, and therefore test if the isolation
facilitates the perception of the three selected voice charac-
teristics, even in subtle cases. All of our rating stimuli are
non-pathological, containing more subtle instances of the target
characteristics. The three voice characteristics were selected be-
cause they represent clinically meaningful dimensions that are
also relevant and present in everyday speech, as much of prior
work often focuses on pathological voices.
In order to investigate whether there are potential improve-
ments in listeners’ perception skills with respect to voice char-
acteristics, we examine whether two different types of train-
ing examples (natural anchor voices vs. synthetically generated
prototypes) embedded as part of an expert explanation affect the
following two measures:
1. listeners’ agreement with expert ratings as a gold standard,
and
2. listeners’ rating sensitivity,
We further examine the rating sensitivity separately for each of
the three selected voice characteristics.
We hypothesize that listeners who receive expert explana-
tions relying on synthetic examples will improve in their agree-
ment with the gold standard and in their perceptual sensitivity
more than listeners who receive natural examples. With this
study, we seek to explore whether the training of novice speech
therapists can be enhanced with voice editing tools, thereby
demonstrating the potential of these technologies in applied
3863
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2475
Figure 1:The experimental phases illustrated from left to right:
each experiment starts with pre-explanation ratings by partic-
ipants, followed by an explanation phase (using either nat-
ural anchors or synthetic examples), and closes with post-
explanation ratings.
voice assessment.
2. Methods
2.1. Participants and speech materials
The participants of this study were 20 students of Clinical Lin-
guistics, all female, with an age range from 18 to 27 years (mean
age = 21.5). They were recruited from the local university and
received monetary compensation or trial hours. All of them re-
ported normal hearing.
For the voice rating task (Section 2.2), we selected 16
German voice samples (8 female, 8 male) fromThe Nautilus
Speaker Characterization Corpus(NSC) [22]. Four voices were
chosen to be reasonable prototypes of each target voice charac-
teristic,creaky, breathy, and rough, along with four voices that
did not contain any of the three target features. Although the tar-
geted features were perceptually dominant in the voices selected
for each characteristic, the samples could still contain other
voice qualities (overlapping or at different timepoints within
the sample), including the remaining target characteristics or
additional ones, to a more subtle degree. The voice samples
consist of semi-spontaneous simulated telephone calls of ap-
proximately 30 seconds and are classified as non-pathological
(‘undiagnosed’, with no known hearing or speech disorders).
Although creaky, breathy, and rough voices are also often de-
scribed in clinical contexts, this study focuses here on their
identification as subtle variations in everyday speech.
2.2. Study design
The main experiment itself was divided into three phases: (a) A
pre-explanation rating of the 16 voices, (b) an explanation of the
three voice characteristics given by an expert explainer, and (c)
a post-explanation rating of the same 16 voices (see Figure 1).
The experiment took place at a recording studio at the local uni-
versity. Each participant was seated across the table from the
expert explainer and rated the voices with respect to the var-
ious voice characteristics in a binary manner (present–absent)
on a prepared form, which contained boxes for all three voice
characteristics plus the option ‘none of them apply’. A field
was added, in which they could list anything (voice-related)
they perceived apart from the prepared features. The partici-
pants were instructed to always choose at least one of the op-
tions (there was no maximum amount), and especially advised
to mark a feature even if it was only temporarily present or sub-
tle. It was allowed to listen to each audio twice if necessary. In
both the pre- and post-explanation phases, the same 16 voices
were played in a randomized order per participant, while male
and female voice samples were alternated. We chose a between-
subjects design, in which 20 participants were alternately as-
signed to either the control group (natural anchor voices, n =
10) or the synthesis group (synthetically generated speech sam-
ples, n =10).
In both groups, the explanations of the voice characteris-
tics contained a description of how they are physiologically
produced and how they can be identified perceptually. Further-
more, the expert explainer imitated the features themselves. For
the control group, natural anchor voice samples (selected from
[23]) of the three chosen characteristics were played, while syn-
thetically generated audio examples were used for the synthesis
group (see 2.4 for details). The explanation phase lasted approx-
imately 10 minutes and was terminated when the participants
signaled that they had fully understood the explanation. During
explanations, the expert explainer followed a script, but the par-
ticipants were encouraged to ask questions, provide feedback,
or discuss any aspect of the explanation. On request, more audio
examples could be synthesized or played. The explanation was
therefore interactive, and the experiment was continued with the
third phase (post-explanation) as soon as the participants indi-
cated they felt prepared enough.
2.3. Gold standard
For selecting the voice samples used in our experiment and for
comparing participants’ ratings to a reference, we defined a
‘gold standard’ that was based on the binary (presence – ab-
sence) ratings of the expert explainer (and first author). To
ensure the gold standard’s validity, the ratings of a subset (20
voices) of the used corpus were compared with those of another
expert listener, showing a high agreement: Cohen’sκ=0.85.
2.4. Speech synthesis system with voice quality manipula-
tion
A recently developed speech synthesis system [20, 21] was used
for generating the speech samples for the explanation phase of
the synthesis group. The system enables the synthesis of voices
with controllable strengths for particular target voice charac-
teristics, such as breathy, creaky, and rough. In this approach,
an existingText-to-Speech (TTS) system[24] was modified by
incorporating a manipulation block that transforms a global
speaker representation. This manipulation block employsCon-
ditional Continuous Normalizing Flows[25, 26] and receives
the strength levels of seven specific voice qualities as condition-
ing input. By modifying these conditioning values, it is possible
to generate speaker representations exhibiting the targeted voice
characteristics. Perceptual evaluations with phonetic experts
showed that the generated modifications follow the intended
conditioning while preserving naturalness, thereby supporting
the effectiveness of the proposed method [20, 21].
2.5. Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were carried out usingR[27]. Data pro-
cessing and visualization were performed using thetidyverse
3864
package [28]. Perceptual sensitivity (d′) and the agreement with
the gold standard (Cohen’sκ) were both calculated at the pre-
and post-timepoints (meaning pre (before) and post (after) the
explanation) at participant level. Cohen’s Kappa was computed
using theirr[29] package inR. For both measures,d ′ and Co-
hen’sκ, higher values indicate better performance. Normality
and homogeneity of variance were verified via Q-Q plots and
residual analyses. We performed within-group paired t-tests for
d′ and Cohen’sκto assess the improvement from the pre- to
post-test for the two groups. Furthermore, independent samples
t-tests were used to compare both metrics between groups to
show differences/equality at the pre- and post-timepoints. The
effects of group (synthetic vs. natural examples) and time (pre
vs. post) were evaluated by implementing a Linear Mixed-
Effects Model (LMER), withgroupandtimeas fixed effects,
andparticipantas a random factor using the packageslme4[30]
andlmerTest[31]. Post-hoc comparisons were carried out using
theemmeanspackage [32].
AnANCOVAwas performed on the post-testd ′ values using
the pre-test values as a covariate to account for pre-test differ-
ences between groups. Within-group changes for specific char-
acteristics (e.g., ‘rough’) were analyzed using paired t-tests, and
between-group improvement was compared using independent
samples t-tests on the difference scores between pre and post.
3. Results
3.1. Agreement with the gold standard and perceptual sen-
sitivity
The descriptive statistics for both the agreement with the gold
standard (κ) and perceptual sensitivity (d ′) are summarized in
Table 1, showing mean (M) and standard deviation (SD). At
the pre-timepoint, both groups performed similarly. After the
explanation phase, the group with synthetic examples showed a
larger increase in meand ′ (M= 1.03,SD= 0.27) compared to
the control group (M= 0.55,SD= 0.40). A similar trend can
be observed for the gold standard agreement.
Within-group analyses revealed a significant increase ind ′
for the synthesis group from pre to post (t(9) =−2.70,p=
.024), while there was no improvement for the control group
(t(9) =−0.38,p=.71). A similar, but non-significant, trend
was found for the gold standard agreement.
For between-group comparisons, independent samples t-
tests confirmed no significant differences between the two
groups at the pre-test timepoint for eitherd ′ (p=.249) orκ
(p=.193). At the post-test timepoint, however, the synthe-
sis group achieved a significantly higher sensitivity (d ′) than
the control group (t(15.77) =−3.08,p=.007); this result
is visualized at the individual level in Figure 2. The same pat-
tern was found for the agreement with the gold standard. The
synthesis group showed a significantly higher agreement at the
post-timepoint than the control group (t(15.33) =−2.55,p=
.022).
3.2. Mixed effects and covariate analyses
The mixed-effects model showed a significant main effect of
group (F(1,18) = 5.76,p=.027), and a marginal ef-
fect for time (F(1,18) = 3.07,p=.097). While the in-
teraction between group and time did not reach significance
(F(1,18) = 1.21,p=.286), post-hoc pairwise comparisons
usingemmeansconfirmed that the groups did not differ at the
pre-timepoint (t(31.9) =−1.35,p=.185), but the synthesis
group achieved significantly higherd ′ values after the expla-
Table 1:Summary of results for perceptual sensitivity (d ′) and
agreement with the gold standard (κ) per group and timepoint.
The values are presented as mean±standard deviation.
Metric / Group Pre-test Post-test
(M±SD) (M±SD)
Sensitivity (d′)
Control group 0.49±0.50 0.55±0.40
Synthesis group 0.73±0.41 1.03±0.27
Agreement (κ)
Control group 0.16±0.16 0.19±0.14
Synthesis group 0.25±0.14 0.33±0.09
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
pre post
Time
d' (D−prime)
control group synthesis group
Figure 2:Individual (per participant) and meand ′ scores for
the pre- and post-timepoint. The thin lines represent the in-
dividual participant trajectories, and the thick lines represent
each group’s means, ‘synthesis group’ (yellow/solid) and ‘con-
trol group’ (blue/dashed).
nation (post) (t(31.9) =−2.60,p=.014). The degrees of
freedom were estimated using theKenward-Roger approxima-
tion.
Furthermore, we performed an ANCOV A with the postd ′
values as the dependent variable and the pred ′ values as a co-
variate. The analysis revealed a significant main effect of group
(t(17) = 2.66,p=.017), showing that the synthesis group
reached a significantly higherd ′ than the control group even
when the baseline is controlled for.
3.3. Dimensional analysis
We analyzed thed ′ scores for the individual voice characteris-
tics (dimensions) (see Figure 3). A paired t-test for the char-
acteristic ‘rough’ revealed a significant improvement from pre
3865
to post for the synthesis group (t(8) = 2.67,p=.028),
whereas the control group showed no significant difference
(t(8) = 0.64,p=.541). An independent t-test on improve-
ment scores (difference of differences), however, did not con-
firm a significant difference between the two groups (t(9.3) =
−0.12,p=.907). No notable improvements could be observed
for ’breathy’ nor ’creaky’, as can be seen in Figure 3.
control group synthesis group
breathy creaky rough breathy creaky rough
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Dimension
d' (D−prime)
Time pre post
Figure 3:This figure shows thed ′ scores per dimension
(voice characteristic) and per group for the pre- and post-
timepoint. The bars indicate mean performance at the pre-
timepoint (gray/dotted) and post (yellow/solid). The left side
displays the control group, and the right side the synthesis
group. Negative values indicate sensitivity below chance level.
4. Discussion
The present study evaluated the effectiveness of a brief expert
explanation using natural anchor voices versus a deep learn-
ing based synthesis system. Our results demonstrate that the
group receiving the synthesis-based explanation outperformed
the control group. This was reflected in both improved agree-
ment with the gold standard (Cohen’sκ) as well as in over-
all sensitivity (d ′). As shown in the individual participant tra-
jectories (Figure 2), the synthesis group displayed a more uni-
form/consistent picture (lower variance) than the control group.
These findings reveal that the synthesis-enhanced explanations
did not merely ‘keep up’ with explanations using natural anchor
voices but actually exceeded them. While previous research
confirmed that traditional synthetic speech can also be a useful
tool for training [10, 33] and improving reliability, our findings
show that modern deep learning techniques provide an effective
tool for voice assessment explanations.
In general, many studies in the field focus primarily on
intra- or inter-rater reliability [34, 33, 15, 35], measuring how
consistently listeners agree with themselves or each other, while
our study emphasizes expert alignment (agreement with the
gold standard) and perceptual sensitivity. By focusing on these
two measures, we demonstrate that the synthesis-based expla-
nation does more than improve participants’ consensus. It suc-
cessfully shifted novice perceptions closer to our gold standard.
When examining specific voice characteristics, ‘rough’ was
the only dimension to show a notable improvement. This is an
important outcome, as literature has identified roughness to be
a particularly difficult characteristic to assess [8, 7, 15]. [8] de-
scribed roughness as a multidimensional construct influenced
by breathiness, which makes the assessment more difficult. The
lack of notable improvement for ‘breathy’ and ‘creaky’ may be
due to comparably high pre-test ratings. In addition to that, be-
cause we employed non-pathological stimuli for the rating task,
where the manifestations of the selected voice characteristics
are more subtle and also not continuous throughout the signal,
participants may have reached a ‘plateau’ for these two charac-
teristics. Given the complexity of voice rating tasks in general,
these results suggest that for speech therapy students, this level
of sensitivity may be the threshold that can be achieved within
a single, short explanation session.
Our ‘training’, consisting of an approximately 10-minute
explanation and discussion, is relatively short compared to other
training methods reported in literature [13, 34, 36]. While mul-
tiple sessions or more interactive designs, e.g., where students
can manipulate the voices themselves, might yield better or
more durable results, it is noteworthy that a measurable effect
was found even with this short amount of training time.
However, some other limitations have to be mentioned. The
relatively small sample size (n=20) probably limited the statis-
tical power of the mixed-effects model. Future research with
larger sample sizes would be necessary to determine whether
our results can be generalized. Additionally, the control group
received two natural anchor voices (male/female) per charac-
teristic and the imitation by the explainer, while the synthesis
group profited from the core strength of our method: the flex-
ibility to hear multiple manipulation strengths within the same
speaker. This can display even subtle instances of our selected
characteristics and make them clearer. To account for this dif-
ference, the explanation phase was designed to be flexible. The
participants were encouraged to ask questions or request more
examples until they felt confident enough to proceed. Even
though this difference may have influenced the outcome, and
potential explainer effects cannot be completely ruled out be-
cause the interactive explanation prevented blinding of the ex-
pert explainer to the experimental condition, it highlights the
inherent advantage of the synthesis system at the same time.
Given the success of the synthesis-based explanations, this
method represents a valuable contribution to training in clini-
cal settings. Rather than focusing on the system’s audio quality
or whether it displays the targeted voice qualities appropriately,
this study validates the actual application of speech synthesis in
an educational context and constitutes a novel way for evalu-
ating synthetic speech applications, by exploring its usefulness
directly embedded in an application context [37]. This method
has the potential to improve voice assessment training and its
effectiveness for speech therapy students, and therefore, even-
tually lead to better therapy outcomes for patients with voice
disorders.
5. Conclusion
This study examined whether synthesis-based explanations can
improve voice quality perception skills in speech therapy stu-
dents. The results showed that the use of synthetically gener-
ated speech enhanced perceptual sensitivity and the agreement
with a gold standard, whereas the use of natural anchor exam-
ples did not yield comparable effects. Especially the perception
of roughness benefited from the explanation using synthetic ex-
amples. Overall, deep learning based voice editing seems to be
a promising tool for voice quality perception training in clinical
education.
3866
6. Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation): TRR 318/3 2026
– 438445824.
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
The software Grammarly was used to check grammar, spelling,
punctuation, and for stylistic polishing. After using the tool, the
authors reviewed the content and take full responsibility for the
content of the article.