Articulatory Entrainment and Coordination Complexity in Spontaneous
Autistic and Non-autistic Dialogue
Thanushi Withanage ID 1,∗∗, Carol Espy-Wilson1, Elizabeth Redcay2, Desi Jones2, Noah Sasson3
1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland College Park, USA
2 Department of Psychology, University of Maryland College Park, USA
3 Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Dallas, USA
thanushi@umd.edu, espy@umd.com, redcay@umd.edu, drjones@umd.edu, nsasson@utdallas.edu
Abstract
Articulatory entrainment, the adaptation of vocal tract coor-
dination to facilitate interaction remains underexplored in spon-
taneous dialogue, particularly among autistic speakers. Many
prior studies have utilized task-based, phoneme-level analyses
with invasive measurement techniques. Here, we introduce
a speaker-independent framework to quantify articulatory en-
trainment in spontaneous dyadic conversations among autistic
and non-autistic adults using acoustic-to-articulatory inversion
and coordination complexity metrics. We examine temporal
changes in articulatory coordination across interaction. Non-
autistic dyads exhibit increasing coordination complexity and
stronger entrainment over time, autistic dyads show moder-
ate effects, and mixed dyads demonstrate the least alignment.
Greater articulatory entrainment correlates with higher self-
reported conversational success, indicating increase in coordi-
nation complexity as a marker of effective social interaction.
Index Terms: vocal tract variables, entrainment, autism, con-
versation, articulatory coordination features, eigen spectra
1. Introduction
During spontaneous social interactions, individuals tend to align
with their interlocutors across multiple modalities, including
acoustics [1], prosody [2], facial motion [3], and language [4].
Such alignment has been associated with rapport, mutual un-
derstanding, and conversational success [1, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Given
widely held assumptions about communication challenges be-
tween autistic and non-autistic individuals, and the potential im-
pact on well-being, characterizing how entrainment manifests
across populations is essential for identifying mechanisms that
support effective interaction. Understanding conversational dy-
namics in autism is particularly important in light of persistent
claims that autistic individuals experience difficulty interpret-
ing or expressing emotion in interaction [9] or they show atypi-
cal articulatory timing patterns linking to reduced motor speech
dynamics [10, 11]. Rather than framing such differences as
deficits, it is critical to examine the specific communicative di-
mensions along which autistic speakers may diverge from com-
monly preferred interactional norms.
Articulatory entrainment, also referred to as phonetic con-
vergence, vocal entrainment, speech accommodation, or speech
attunement, refers to voluntary or involuntary adjustments that
increase similarity between conversational partners’ speaking
styles and articulatory gestures. Many acoustic and pho-
netic work has examined convergence using non-invasive au-
dio recordings [8, 12, 13]. However, because speech produc-
tion arises from complex vocal tract dynamics, studies that di-
rectly measure articulatory kinematics have often relied on elec-
**indicates the corresponding author.
tromagnetic articulography [14, 15, 16, 17] or ultrasound [18],
which require specialized recording setups and may alter natu-
ral speech due to sensor placement. Prior work with non-autistic
participants shows that speakers can adapt tongue [15, 17], jaw,
and lip movements [16] toward those of their partners. How-
ever, many articulatory and acoustic-phonetic studies use con-
trolled or semi-structured paradigms, such as shadowing [19],
word repetition, picture-description tasks [5], and map-task in-
teractions [20], which may not fully capture the variability of
spontaneous dialogue. Thus, less is known about how articula-
tory coordination emerges in naturalistic spontaneous dialogue,
especially in autistic and mixed-neurotype interactions.
In natural conversation, phoneme boundary detection is less
reliable because coarticulation and articulatory undershoot in-
crease speech variability [21]. Also communicative goals es-
pecially in task-based or human–robot interactions [9] may in-
fluence normal speaking style. Research conducted with close
acquaintances [4, 22] differ fundamentally from first time get-
to-know-you interactions, as familiar interlocutors typically ex-
hibit faster, more efficient, and socially attuned communication
characterized by shorter conversational gaps and greater robust-
ness to interference, whereas newly acquainted speakers engage
in more tentative, deliberate, and socially cautious exchanges.
Furthermore, studies including articulatory precision measures
derived from read speech may not generalize to everyday in-
teraction. Recent approaches using deep neural networks [2]
and transformer architectures [23] attempt to model short-term
vocal entrainment by predicting interlocutors’ adjacent turns
from acoustic features, yet their interpretability remains limited,
making it difficult to identify which specific articulatory dimen-
sions drive alignment. Research including autistic participants
in task oriented studies have shown that autistic children and
adults have reduced articulatory precision hence reduce verbal
entrainment [24]. Also some studies have shown that conversa-
tional convergence is different between males and females [13].
In this study, we introduce a novel, non-invasive, speaker-
independent framework to quantify the degree and direction of
articulatory entrainment in spontaneous, task-free dyadic con-
versations using vocal tract variables derived from an acoustic-
to-articulatory speech inversion technique [25]. We analyze
articulatory entrainment in two datasets: one comprising non-
autistic dyads and another including autistic, non-autistic, and
mixed-neurotype interactions. We investigate how articulatory
coordination emerges and evolves over time, how it differs
across neurotype pairings, and how these dynamics relate to
participants’ perceived conversational success. By extending
entrainment analysis to vocal tract dynamics, this work demon-
strates that conversational alignment offer deeper insight into
communication across neurodiverse interactions and informing
4516
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2855
models designed to better support effective dialogue.
2. Datasets
2.1. CANDOR Dataset
Our study uses the CANDOR dataset (Conversation: A Nat-
uralistic Dataset of Online Recordings), developed by Bet-
terUp Labs in collaboration with the University of Pennsylvania
(2023) [26]. The corpus includes recordings of 1,656 natural-
istic, task-free dyadic 30 minute Zoom conversations. Partic-
ipants were previously unacquainted adults, and after each in-
teraction, both completed post-session surveys assessing con-
versational quality, from which a perceived conversational suc-
cess metric was derived [27]. Audio was recorded on sepa-
rate channels per speaker, eliminating the need for diarization.
Only the sessions flagged by the dataset as without substan-
tial noise or interruptions were retained. Participants ranged
in age from 19 to 66 and represented diverse gender, educa-
tional, ethnic, and generational backgrounds. From participants
who completed the Autism Spectrum Quotient social skill and
communication subscales; scores≥6on either subscale were
treated as elevated autistic traits, following established thresh-
olds [28]. To focus on a sufficiently powered, clinically defined
sample, we excluded dyads in which either participant met this
elevated-trait criterion (a small, non-diagnosed subgroup), re-
taining 1381 non-autistic–non-autistic (NA–NA) dyadic inter-
actions.
2.2. UTD Dataset
We chose a subset (participants who consented for their record-
ings to be used in studies) of the UTD dataset [3, 29] that com-
prises of 62 dyadic interactions, including 18 autistic–autistic
(AT-AT) dyads, 31 autistic–non-autistic (AT-NA) dyads, and
13 NA-NA dyads. AT participants met diagnostic criteria on
the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, Second Edition
(ADOS-2), and all participants had an IQ above 80. AT par-
ticipants were recruited either from the University of Texas at
Dallas or from the local community. All participants were pre-
viously unacquainted and were not informed of their interlocu-
tor’s diagnostic status. Each dyad engaged in a five-minute, un-
structured, non-task-oriented, face-to-face interaction designed
as a “get-to-know-you” conversation.
3. Method
3.1. Feature extraction
3.1.1. Audio prepossessing
For the CANDOR dataset, audio recordings were first converted
from dual-channel 44.1 kHz to mono-channel 16 kHz. A 14 dB
speech enhancement technique was used to reduce background
noise, followed by silence removal using the Silero voice activ-
ity detection framework. The resulting speaker-specific audio
streams were then segmented into 40-second chunks.
For the UTD dataset, separate speaker audio channels for
speakers were not available. Therefore, the audio feed from the
centrally positioned microphone was diarized using Pyannote
to obtain individual speaker audio streams. Prior to diarization,
the researcher’s speech before the start of the interaction was re-
moved from the recordings using Adobe Premiere Pro. A 14 dB
speech enhancement algorithm was subsequently applied to re-
duce background noise, after which each speaker’s audio (with-
out overlaps) was segmented into 3-second chunks for further
analysis.
3.1.2. TV eigen spectra generation
Each audio segment was processed using a speech inversion
system [25] to extract six time-varying vocal tract variables
(TVs): lip aperture, lip protrusion, tongue tip constriction de-
gree and location, and tongue body constriction degree and lo-
cation. These articulatory trajectories were used to construct
higher-order articulatory coordination feature (ACF) matrices
by computing pairwise cross-correlations among TV channels
with a fixed 7 second delay [30]. For each segment, the rank-
ordered eigenvalue vector (90-dimensional eigenspectrum) of
the ACF matrix was computed to obtain a compact representa-
tion of articulatory coordination structure.
Figure 1:Coordination simulation and eigen spectra compari-
son for simple, complex and erratic speech
P. Divenyi and Adam Lammert [31] simulated different
types of phasing between gestures (simple, complex, and er-
ratic) to illustrate how articulatory coordination is reflected in
the eigen spectra. In the replication of those simulations shown
in Figure 1 each gesture was represented by a sine wave (first
set of panels in Figure 1). The second plot in Figure 1 shows
that, compared to typical speech, which generally involves com-
plex coordination, speech with simpler phasing (e.g., speech
produced at a slow speaking rate) has only a few lower-ranked
eigenvalues with substantial magnitude. This indicates that
slower speech can be represented using a small number of in-
dependent dimensions. In contrast, more complex speech (e.g.,
speech produced at a faster speaking rate) exhibits more com-
plex phasing: the lower-rank eigenvalues are smaller in magni-
tude relative to normal speech, while the higher-rank eigenval-
ues become larger.
Figure 2:Eigen spectra for an individual for each quarter of
the conversation
In previous studies, we have shown that speech with sim-
pler coordination exhibits considerably less variability (i.e., less
coarticulation and undershoot) [32], whereas more complex
speech shows greater variability [33]. As pertained to this study,
increased complexity may reflect greater articulatory flexibility,
more relaxed speaking style and coarticulation as speakers be-
come more comfortable, whereas reduced complexity may arise
from more deliberate, effortful articulation when intelligibility
is prioritized. Because the CANDOR dataset contains longer
conversations, we divide each interaction into 4 quarters to ex-
amine temporal changes in articulatory coordination. As shown
4517
Figure 3:Difference eigen spectra for an individual for each
quarter of the conversation with first quarter eigen spectra as
the reference
in Figure 2, the eigen spectra of an individual progressively flat-
ten across quarters, indicating increasing articulatory coordina-
tion complexity over time. Using the first quarter as a reference
(Figure 3), the calculated difference eigen spectra further show
that coordination complexity increases as the conversation pro-
gresses.
3.2. Entrainment calculation
In this work we define entrainment as global articulatory con-
vergence [34] occurring in conversations. Each conversation
was divided into two temporal halves and an average eigen
spectrum (v) was calculated for each speaker taking the aver-
age of the eigen spectra of their ACF matrices within each half.
This procedure was applied to both speakers in every conversa-
tion, resulting in four sets ofvper conversation (two speakers ×
two halves).
If articulatory entrainment occurs between interlocutors,
the eigen spectra of the two speakers are expected to become
more similar and closer as the interaction progresses. To quan-
tify this effect, we compared the gap of thevof the two speakers
in the first half of the conversation and repeated the same com-
parison for the second half. Under the entrainment hypothesis,
the gap between the speakers’vshould decrease from the first
half to the second half of the interaction.
A straightforward approach to measure gap is to compute
the absolute distance between the two speakers’v, which as-
signs equal weight to all eigenvalues. However, we adopted a
weighted distance measure rather than a simple absolute differ-
ence to more effectively capture entrainment-related changes in
eigen spectral structure. For eachv, a weighted sum of geomet-
ric decay score (W) was computed, similar to the approach in
[33], as shown in Equation 1. In here the variablehrepresents
which half (first or second) of the conversation is used,jrep-
resents which speaker (first or second) is used andirepresents
the eigen value index in a 90 dimensionalv.v[i]corresponds to
ith indexed term ofv.
W (h)
sj =
90X
i=1
v[i](h)
sj α i−1, j,h∈{1,2},α∈(0,1](1)
This score yields a single scalar value for eachvby assign-
ing greater weights to lower-ranked (more prominent) eigen-
values, with weights decaying progressively with rank. This is
due tovmultiplied by a decay factor. The decay rate is con-
trolled by the parameterα, where values closer to 1 correspond
to slower decay ensuring all eigen values are equally contribut-
ing whereas values closer to 0 emphasize the contribution from
the most prominent eigen values. Then allW (h)
sj values were
normalized to the range [0,1], yielding normalizedW (h)
sj (ω(h)
sj )
scores.ω (h)
sj was computed for each speaker in each half of ev-
ery conversation. Finally, the difference inω (h)
sj between the
two speakers (∆ω (h)) was calculated for each half of the con-
versation as shown in Equation 2. A decrease in∆ω(h) from the
first half to the second half was interpreted as evidence of artic-
ulatory entrainment. A Cohen’s d analysis indicated that the
separation between the first and second halves’∆ω (h) is pri-
marily driven by the most prominent eigenvalues. Specifically,
varying the weighting parameterαshowed that maximal sepa-
ration in∆ω (h) occurred atα= 0.51. Accordingly,α= 0.51
was used for subsequent analyses.
To quantify entrainment, we analyze each speaker’s indi-
vidual trajectoryω (h)
sj over time. For example, Equation 3 com-
putes the direction and magnitude of the shift ofs 1 fromω (1)
s1
toω (2)
s1 relative to the initial position ofs 2, thus capturing one-
way entrainment ofs 1 towardss 2. Specifically, the formulation
evaluates whetherω (2)
s1 moved closer to the direction ofω (1)
s2 .
For example consider the case where the initial configura-
tion satisfiesω (1)
s1 > ω(1)
s2 . Then the initial separation∆ω (1) is
negative (based on Equation 2), and ifs1 moves towards 2, then
the shift termω (2)
s1 −ω (1)
s1 is also negative. Consequently, both
terms within the sign component of Equation 3 are negative,
yielding a positive deviationd 1. Thus, a positived 1 indicates
convergence ofs 1(movement toward the partners 2), whereas a
negative value indicates divergence. The magnitude ofd 1 re-
flects the strength of this directional adjustment.
Similarly, Equation 4 quantifies the one-way entrainment
ofs 2 towards 1. Directional shifts are therefore computed sep-
arately for each speaker. The overall entrainment measuree
is then obtained by combining the two deviations (d 1,d 2) and
normalizing them by the initial separation∆ω (1), as shown in
Equation 5. This formulation yields a signed entrainment score
representing total dyadic convergence or divergence as a pro-
portion of the initial inter-speaker distance, and it remains valid
across all initial configurations and directional movement sce-
narios.
∆ω(h) =ω (h)
s2 −ω (h)
s1 , h∈{1,2}(2)
d1 = sgn (∆ω(1) 
ω(2)
s1 −ω (1)
s1
ω(2)
s1 −ω (1)
s1
 (3)
d2 = sgn (−∆ω(1) 
ω(2)
s2 −ω (1)
s2
ω(2)
s2 −ω (1)
s2
 (4)
e= d1 +d 2
|∆ω(1)| = sgn (∆ω(1)

(∆ω(1)−∆ω (2)
|∆ω(1)| )(5)
4. Results
4.1. TV coordination complexity
To observe TV coordination complexity variations over time we
conducted a statistical test on the NA-NA dyads in the CAN-
DOR dataset utilizingω (h)
sj . A two-way repeated-measures
ANOV A with half and speaker as within-subject factors showed
meanω sj decreased from first to second half (0.3552 to
0.3352). The analysis showed a significant main effect of half
(F(1,1380) = 170.54,p < .001), no significant main effect
of speaker(F(1,1380) = 0.49,p=.482), and no significant
half×speaker interaction(F(1,1380) = 3.07,p=.080); the
dyad-level paired comparison showed a decrease from first to
the second half(t(1380) = 13.06,p < .001), while within-
half speaker differences were not significant. Taken together,
these results indicate a pronounced shift from the first to the
second half of conversations that is shared across speakers, with
negligible speaker-specific variation. Henceω (1)
sj > ω(2)
sj and
4518
(a)
(b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 4:(a) Mean & standard deviation variations ofωof NA-NA dyads vs. quarter of conversation for the CANDOR dataset. (b)
Percentage of Conversations showing positive entrainment (e >0) and high PCS in NA-NA dyads of CANDOR dataset. (c) Mean &
standard deviation variations ofω (h) vs. two halves of conversations for different dyad groups (by speaker) in the UTD dataset. (d)
Entrainment vs. dyad type in UTD dataset.
justifies that speakers become more complex coordinated over
time.
A finer-grained analysis of the mean and standard devia-
tion ofω (h)
sj across conversation quarters (Figure 4(a)) reveals
a marked decrease from the first to the second quarter, indicat-
ing increasing coordination complexity. To further refine this
observation, a two-way repeated-measures ANOV A with quar-
ter and speaker as within-subject factors; meanω (q)
sj decreased
from 0.3904 to 0.3560. The analysis showed a main effect of
quarter(F(3,4134) = 136.81,p < .001), no main effect
of speaker(F(1,1378) = 0.41,p=.524), and a quarter×
speaker interaction(F(3,4134) = 2.94,p=.032). FDR-
corrected pairwise comparisons confirmed progressive changes
across quarters, while within-quarter speaker differences were
largely non-significant. As illustrated in Figure 4(a), the largest
decline in meanωfor both speakers occurs early, approximately
within the first 7 minutes suggesting that increased articulatory
coordination emerges relatively early in the interaction.
For the UTD datasetω (h) range variation of each dyad
group over time are plotted in Figure 4(c). When observing the
meanωit is clear that NA-NA dyads showed complex coordi-
nation towards the end indicating comfort, AT-AT dyads partic-
ipants maintain similar complexity throughout the conversation
without much variation, whereas in mixed dyad group partic-
ipants tend to get more simpler coordinated at the end. This
might happen due to the thought overload of trying to make
oneself more clearer and explainable toward the other interlocu-
tor when the partner is a different neurotype. This is consistent
with the double empathy framework [3] and is consistent with
the results observed in CANDOR dataset.
4.2. Entrainment
Figure 4(b) illustrates the relationship between perceived con-
versational success and the metricein NA-NA dyads of CAN-
DOR dataset. When0< e <1, the speakers progressively re-
duce their separation over time, indicating gradual entrainment
toward the end of the conversation. Ife >1, the speakers’ω
trajectories cross at some point during the interaction, imply-
ing strong convergence with overlap in the intermediate stage.
An outcome ofe= 0indicates that the speakers maintain a
constant separation and stabilize at differentωvalues without
convergence or divergence. Whene <0, the speakers di-
verge over time, reflecting a lack of entrainment. The first two
cases (e >0) are therefore interpreted as entrainment. Ma-
jority of highly successful conversations fall within the range
e >0. This pattern suggests that articulatory entrainment is
associated with higher perceived conversational success in the
NA-NA dyad group.
When examining the entrainment patterns in the UTD
dataset, we divided each conversation into two halves, con-
sistent with the initial analysis conducted on the CANDOR
dataset. Further segmentation was not performed because the
interactions are relatively short in duration. Figure 4(d) illus-
trates the entrainment range, measured using|∆ω(1)|−|∆ω(2)|,
for conversations grouped by dyad type. If|∆ω(1)|−|∆ω (2)|>
0then that conversation has entrained, while if|∆ω (1)|−
|∆ω(2)|<0then that conversation is not entrained. Using
that logic, results shown in Figure 4(d) depicts that NA–NA
dyads exhibit the highest level of entrainment (mostly posi-
tive), whereas the lowest entrainment is observed in the mixed
dyad group. Interestingly AT-AT dyads have shown relatively
more entrainment than mixed dyads showing that there is more
alignment between same neurotype participants when convers-
ing. This is consistent with the results observed in CANDOR
dataset.
5. Conclusion
This study introduces a principled quantitative framework for
measuring articulatory entrainment based on dynamic changes
in coordination patterns over the course of an interaction. Ar-
ticulatory features allow us to examine speech not only as an
acoustic signal, but as a dynamic motor behavior that reflects
how speakers coordinate, adapt in an interpretable manner.
Across two independent datasets, we demonstrate that same-
neurotype dyads exhibit increasing articulatory coordination be-
coming more complex coordinated as conversations progress,
suggesting greater interactional comfort and reduced articula-
tory effort toward the end of the exchange. In contrast, mixed-
neurotype dyads show patterns consistent with sustained or in-
creased articulatory effort, potentially reflecting adaptive strate-
gies to enhance speech clarity and mutual intelligibility. This
is in line with the Lindblom’s Hypo- and Hyper-articulation
theory. Also, articulatory entrainment is more prominent and
shows a positive association with perceived conversational suc-
cess among non-autistic interactions. These findings highlight
the role of articulatory coordination and entrainment as markers
of interactional alignment and communicative efficacy. Future
work will extend this framework to datasets involving autistic
children and to multi-participant interactions in workplace and
task-oriented settings, enabling a broader understanding of ar-
ticulatory coordination dynamics across developmental stages
and s