TMASC: Transmasculine Attitude and Speech Corpus
Sidney Wong ID 1,2,∗,∗∗
1 Centre for Sustainability Research, University of Otago, New Zealand
2 Te P¯unaha Matatini Centre of Research Excellence for Complex Systems, New Zealand
sidney.wong@otago.ac.nz
Abstract
We introduce the Transmasculine Attitudes and Speech Corpus
(TMASC), a multimodal corpus of 196 transmasculine individ-
uals, including questionnaire responses and 66 audio record-
ings. The questionnaire includes items exploring the vocal
health of transmasculine individuals. The audio recordings in-
clude cough and throat-clearing samples, a reading passage, and
additional session-specific questions. This paper outlines the
development of this corpus and the data collection procedures.
To illustrate the utility of this corpus, we present three case stud-
ies demonstrating how this crowd-sourced multimodal corpus
can be used to support transmasculine individuals. These in-
clude the integration of perceptual and acoustic data, the iden-
tification of group-level characteristics, and the calibration of
acoustic measurements.
Index Terms: queer & trans voices, dataset, speech perception
1. Introduction
A gender-congruent voice predicts greater well-being for trans-
masculine individuals [1]. However, research into the vocal
needs of transmasculine individuals has not received the same
attention as that of transfeminine individuals. This imbalance
has stemmed from the prevailing belief that testosterone re-
placement therapy (TRT) sufficiently lowers pitch, or the funda-
mental frequency (f0), to achieve a satisfactory voice [2][3]. In
fact, the needs of these groups are vastly different. In addition
to TRT [4], the use of chest binding [5], top surgery [6], glot-
toplasty [7], and informal vocal practices such as smoking to
lower speaking pitch [8] all have an impact on the vocal health
of transmasculine individuals. While vocal training provided
by speech and language therapists often works with transmas-
culine patients to achieve a masculine speaking pitch based on
cisgender population norms, speakingf 0 alone does not equate
to a gender-affirming voice [9].
In this paper, we introduce the Transmasculine Attitudes
and Speech Corpus (TMASC). The TMASC corpus was origi-
nally developed as part of the author’s Master’s thesis [10]. The
primary aim of this crowd-sourced multimodal corpus is to pro-
vide researchers, health practitioners, and community members
with access to a high-quality data source that can be used to
investigate the vocal needs of transmasculine individuals. The
corpus consists of a questionnaire addressing the psychosocial
and communicative effects that may impact this diverse popu-
lation. Optionally, participants were encouraged to provide a
speech sample (including a cough and throat-clearing sample,
as well as a reading passage), which could be analysed along-
side their questionnaire responses. Therefore, TMASC offers
*These authors contributed equally.
**indicates the corresponding author.
a unique view of the vocal needs of transmasculine individuals
at a community level. In order to demonstrate the benefits of
our multimodal approach, we consider how acoustic informa-
tion can be used to determine population-level socio-acoustic
norms.
2. Related Works
An individual’s voice is frequently used as an external cue of
gender [11]. This is particularly apparent for some transmas-
culine individuals who have experienced changes to their voice
during TRT [12][13]. Physiological changes to the speech ap-
paratus as a result of TRT are only one aspect of the self-
perception of gender. In reality, multiple factors impact the vo-
cal situation of transmasculine individuals. These factors can
be grouped into:presentational factors, including the method
or methods used to change vocal gender presentation, anatom-
ical dimensions of vocal organs, and gender-related vocal fea-
tures;attributional factors, including self-perception of voice in
regard to gender as well as gender attribution by others;norma-
tive factors, including standards of femininity and masculinity;
and lastly,diversity, involving the subjective positioning of gen-
der, and method(s) used to change gender presentation [8].
With this in mind, a holistic approach is therefore required
to understand the vocal health needs of transmasculine indi-
viduals. Health practitioners would use diagnostic question-
naires to determine the vocal needs of transgender individuals.
Some of the earliest questionnaires included the V oice Handi-
cap Index (VHI) [14], the Transgender Self-Evaluation Ques-
tionnaire (TSEQ) [15], and the Transgender V oice Question-
naire for Female-to-Male (TVQ-FTM) [16]. Once again, it is
important to note that these diagnostic tools were developed to
address the needs of transfeminine individuals. Only recently
have we seen the development of the Transgender V oice Ques-
tionnaire for Female-to-Male (TVQ-FTM), responding to the
unique needs of transmasculine people. One limitation of di-
agnostic questionnaires is that the results cannot be easily in-
terpreted alongside acoustic information. Furthermore, these
diagnostic tools are used to determine the needs of individuals
and not at a community level.
As research into the vocal needs of transgender individuals
has moved from a clinical to a social domain, we now know
that a gender-congruent voice does not necessarily align with
cisgender population benchmarks [17]. Therefore, there is an
increased need to establish community-appropriate benchmarks
outside a diagnostic setting [18][19]. With the popularisation of
personal electronic devices (such as smartphones and laptops),
crowd-sourcing is becoming an increasingly cost-effective ap-
proach in the development of corpora for clinical purposes [20].
For example, aPalette of Transmasculine V oicesincluded the
3669
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2637
voices of 20 American English-speaking transmasculine men,
transmasculine non-binary people, and cisgender men [21]. The
corpus included Consensus Auditory-Perceptual Evaluation of
V oice sentences, theRainbow Passage, and a novel set of sen-
tences. While the corpus is restricted to a limited sociolin-
guistic context, the results show that it is possible to establish
community-appropriate population benchmarks at scale.
3. Methodology
Influenced by existing work in dialectology, we adopted a
crowd-sourcing approach in the development of TMASC. As
mentioned previously, the corpus consisted of a questionnaire
and an optional speech sample. Of the 196 completed question-
naires, 66 participants provided a speech sample through their
personal electronic devices. The participants were recruited on-
line through email and social media networks. The data were
collected over a three-month period between July 2017 and Oc-
tober 2017. In this section, we provide an overview of our
methodology, including the ethical considerations, participants,
data collection procedures, and data availability.
3.1. Ethical Considerations
TMASC was developed in consultation with researchers and
community members. All participants were provided with in-
formation detailing the purpose and aim of the study. We
received approval from the University of Canterbury Human
Ethics Committee (HEC 2017/12). Only those who were 18
years or older were included in our analysis. All raw, unedited
data were stored for a period of five years. The contact de-
tails of participants were stored separately from the speech and
questionnaire data. Following the questionnaire, participants
were presented with a debriefing screen, and links were pro-
vided to additional resources and further research into trans-
gender and gender non-conforming individuals. If participants
desired more information about vocal health and surgical pro-
cedures for voice masculinisation, such as thyroplasty type 3,
this was also provided. A summary of results was sent to par-
ticipants on request.
3.2. Participants
The typical profile of a participant was aged between 22 and
37.5; was of European descent and resided in a predominantly
English- or German-speaking country; did not smoke; identified
as queer and was equally attracted to female- and male-bodied
people; was assigned female at birth and preferred ‘he/him/his’
pronouns (for the English-speaking participants); had disclosed
their gender history to their family, partner, and friends; and, at
the time of data collection, was binding and was experiencing
negative health impacts from their binding techniques.
3.2.1. Geographic Source
In terms of geographic spread, participants spent their formative
years in English-speaking countries such as the United States
(n= 55), Australia (n= 23), New Zealand (n= 14), Canada
(n= 11), and the United Kingdom (n= 11), and predomi-
nantly German-speaking countries such as Germany (n= 31)
and Switzerland (n= 10). This broad geo-linguistic distri-
bution of the corpus can be observed in the language condi-
tions of the reading passages, where the majority were in En-
glish (n= 50) and the remaining recordings were in German
(n= 16).
3.2.2. Gender
Participants were asked to input words that best described their
gender identity (What word(s) best describe your gender iden-
tity?). Many participants included multiple terms to describe
their gender identity. An exploratory textual analysis was con-
ducted to identify the most significant gender identities in the
study. Participants used the termsmale,man,non-binary,trans-
masculine,trans,transman, ortransgender, as well asgen-
derqueeroragender, to describe their gender. Eight participants
specifiedfemale-to-maleorFtM.
3.3. Data Collection
In this section, we describe the data collection procedures, in-
cluding the software, as well as the speech sample and ques-
tionnaire design.
3.3.1. Software
The questionnaire results and speech samples were collected
and housed on theLanguage, Brain and Behaviour Corpus
Analysis Tool(LaBB-CAT; [22]), which is a browser-based cor-
pus analysis tool. Participants had the option to complete the
study using their own personal electronic devices (e.g. lap-
tops, desktop computers, tablets, mobile phones, etc.). Due to
the crowd-sourced nature of the recordings, sampling rates and
recording conditions varied across participants’ devices.
3.3.2. Speech Sample
Participants were given the choice to provide speech samples.
The speech sample comprised four components, including a
throat-clearing sample, a cough sample, and the reading pas-
sageNorth Wind and the Sunin a language of their choosing.
Translations were retrieved from the Aesop Language Bank (in-
cluding English, German, Dutch, French, Russian, Hindi, Tra-
ditional Chinese, Simplified Chinese, Japanese, and Korean)
and were proofread for clarity and consistency. At the conclu-
sion of the speech sample, we included additional questions for
participants to indicate whether they were binding during the
session. All sound files were saved in .wav format.
3.3.3. Questionnaire
The questionnaire consisted of 60 questions, grouped into rel-
evant blocks to address different vocal needs of transmascu-
line individuals [8]. The questions included a mix of binary
and multivariate responses. Open-ended questions were lim-
ited; however, participants were able to answer in relation to
their gender or sexual orientation in a free text box. Questions
one to four in the first block addressed self-perception. This
block included questions related to participants’ vocal satisfac-
tion and how they used their voice. Questions 5 to 32 were
related to participants’ vocal and communicative factors. Ques-
tions 33 to 40 were only available to participants if they indi-
cated they had taken testosterone. The questions in this block
included testosterone usage history and how testosterone had
affected the participants’ voice. If participants indicated they
did not use testosterone, they were redirected to the penultimate
block of questions, which included questions about vocal inter-
vention methods in questions 41 to 48. Questions 49 to 59 were
included to gather demographic information about participants,
such as age and country of origin, as well as sensitive questions
regarding their gender identity, assigned sex at birth, and sexual
orientation.
3670
3.4. Data A vailability
The anonymised questionnaires and acoustic data can be ac-
cessed through the project’s Open Science Foundation (OSF)
repository1. While we envisioned the corpus to be freely avail-
able, user registration and password protection were enabled to
keep track of the research outputs from the corpus.
4. Case Studies
In lieu of a results section, we describe the following use cases
to demonstrate how TMASC can be used for socio-acoustic
and perceptual research. We used R through RStudio for data
analysis and data visualisation. Acoustic measurements (such
as mean and modef 0) were retrieved through the Praat inte-
gration in LaBB-CAT and Robust Epoch And Pitch EstimatoR
(REAPER) [23]. Our three case studies show how the question-
naire data can be used to understand self-perceived vocal health,
establish community-level benchmarks, and how the speech
samples can be used to calibrate community-specific acoustic
measures.
4.1. Self-Perceived V ocal Health
Figure 1:Stacked bar graph of perceived vocal satisfaction.
The 196 completed questionnaires in the corpus offer a
holistic view of the self-perceived vocal health of transmascu-
line individuals. To illustrate this, we present the results from
self-perceived vocal masculinity (I believe my current voice is
...) and ideal voice (My ideal voice is ...), both measured on a
five-point Likert scale, as shown in Figure 1. Furthermore, we
can combine questions to determine interactions, such as those
between self-perceived vocal masculinity and personal impacts,
as shown in Figure 2. The personal impacts include:I have a
speaking voice that feels authentic to me(Authentic Speaking),
I’m consciously trying to change my voice(Consciously Chang-
ing),my voice makes me feel masculine(Feels Masculine),my
voice frustrates me(Frustrated), andI feel self-conscious about
how strangers perceive my voice(self Conscious).
4.2. Community-Level Benchmarks
The key strength of the TMASC corpus is the inclusion of per-
ceptual and acoustic information. The speech samples offer an
additional dimension of analysis. We can use this self-report
to determine perceived social correlates of speech in the case
of meanf 0. As shown in Figure 3, we visualised meanf 0
grouped by self-perceived vocal masculinity as box plots. We
found that the majority of participants viewed their voice as in
between; meanwhile, those who perceived their voice as some-
what male had a lower meanf 0 than those who perceived their
voice as very male. A similar effect was observed for those who
1https://osf.io/tg8bc/
Figure 2:Stacked bar graphs of perceived limiting factors.
perceived their voice as somewhat female. This suggests there
was only a weak linear relationship between self-perceived vo-
cal masculinity and acoustic measurements, such as meanf 0.
When we applied a similar analysis to vocal satisfaction (Are
you satisfied with your present voice?), as shown in Figure 4,
we observed a more linear relationship between vocal satisfac-
tion and meanf 0.
Figure 3:Boxplot of meanf 0 grouped by vocal masculinity.
With access to the speech samples, it is also possible to
interrogate the combined perceptual and acoustic information.
For example, we visualised the same data used to create Figure
4 as a density plot. With reference to Figure 5, where we vi-
sualised meanf 0 grouped by vocal satisfaction, we observed a
unimodal distribution for respondents who were satisfied with
their voice (‘yes’), with the peak below 100 Hz. However, for
those who were somewhat satisfied with their voice (‘some-
3671
Figure 4:Density plot of meanf 0 grouped by vocal perception.
what’), we observed a bimodal distribution with the first peak
around 100 Hz and the second peak around 130 Hz.
Figure 5:Density plot of meanf 0 grouped by vocal satisfaction.
4.3. Calibration of Acoustic Measures
We now show how the TMASC corpus can be used to cali-
brate acoustic measures used to determine a gender-conforming
speaking voice. In terms of open-source software, Praat and
REAPER are frequently used to retrieve meanf 0. Differences
in pitch-tracking algorithms and estimation strategies may lead
to systematic variation in the resulting acoustic measurements
across tools. We use time on testosterone to calibrate and
compare the acoustic measures retrieved from both Praat and
REAPER. REAPER has been proposed as an alternative pitch-
tracking tool which can accurately estimate glottal closure in-
stants, voicing state, andf 0. Praat estimates meanf 0 mea-
surements over the phrase, while REAPER estimatesf 0 at each
glottal closure. For example, the medianf 0 measurement ex-
tracted from Praat via LaBB-CAT for the sample population
was 137.8 Hz, and the mean was 150.7 Hz (range = 88.2–489
Hz). The meanf 0 measurement extracted from REAPER was
114 Hz, and the meanf 0 was 119.1 Hz (range = 78–185 Hz).
The meanf 0 measurements extracted from REAPER were sig-
nificantly lower than those extracted from Praat.
5. Discussion & Conclusion
The purpose of the Transmasculine Attitudes and Speech Cor-
pus (TMASC) was not to develop a diagnostic tool for vo-
Figure 6:Scatterplot comparing meanf 0 measures by time on
testosterone.
cal health practitioners; instead, the corpus provides a valuable
source of perceptual and acoustic information to understand the
vocal needs of transmasculine individuals. More importantly,
we showed that a crowd-sourcing approach is a cost-effective
way to produce a corpus to establish community-appropriate
benchmarks which would otherwise be missed in a clinical en-
vironment. We now address some of the limitations of TMASC.
There are several limitations to the current study.
Firstly, the corpus is not a longitudinal study and does not
include data regarding the individual effects of testosterone on
transmasculine individuals. It is a cross-sectional demographic
survey that attempts to explore vocal satisfaction and quality of
life of transmasculine individuals abroad. The longitudinal as-
sumptions made in the current study only explore population
trends and do not account for changes occurring at the individ-
ual level. However, the results from the current study do suggest
that systemic changes are needed in the management of trans-
masculine vocal health.
Secondly, the data were not collected under laboratory con-
ditions; therefore, the acoustic measurements extracted may be
severely impacted by extraneous factors not accounted for in
the current study. These extraneous factors could include faulty
equipment or background noise, which may affect the quality of
the recording. Participants may also be influenced or distracted
by their immediate surroundings, as the study was conducted
online.f 0, as an acoustic measure, is relatively stable, and
REAPER is sensitive to these signals. Furthermore, participants
may feel more at ease providing a speech sample in a famil-
iar environment, in contrast to laboratory conditions. However,
validation studies should be conducted in the future to compare
the acoustic quality of personal recording equipment and speech
recorded under laboratory conditions.
Thirdly, there is no control over who participates in a study
that is conducted online, and there are no guarantees as to how
many people will participate. Nearly all the participants who
provided a speech sample came from English-speaking coun-
tries, and some from German-speaking countries, even though
transcripts were available in a number of languages. However,
the current study was able to reach over 185 participants in more
than 15 different countries. The ability to collect data from so
many transmasculine individuals across the globe suggests that
the lack of diversity in the current study can be mitigated in the
future with proper promotion and marketing. Furthermore, the
fact that the questionnaire was in English may exclude those
who do not speak English as an additional language.
3672
6. Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Vica Papp and Tika Ormond for their su-
pervision. I would also like to thank Robert Fromont for design-
ing the underlying architecture of TMASC. I would also like
to thank the panel of researchers and community members for
their input into the design of TMASC. This research was made
possible through the UC College of Arts Master of Linguistics
thesis scholarship and funding from the School of Language,
Social and Political Science. Lastly, I would like to acknowl-
edge Te P ¯unaha Matatini, New Zealand’s Centre of Research
Excellence in Complex Systems, for enabling this work to be
published through my Postdoctoral Fellowship.
7. Use of Generative AI Disclosure
The author acknowledges the use of generative AI (Microsoft
Copilot, GPT-5) for editing and polishing the manuscript fol-
lowing peer review to improve clarity, grammar, and consis-
tency with British English orthography. No generative AI tools
were used to produce substantive content.