One-to-Many Electrolaryngeal V oice Conversion with Synthetic Data
Bowen Wu1,3, Haruto Ueno1,2, Carlos Toshinori Ishi1,3, Chaoran Liu1,3,4
1 Guardian Robot Project, RIKEN, Japan
2 Graduate School of Engineering Science, The University of Osaka, Japan
3 Hiroshi Ishiguro Laboratories, ATR, Japan
4 Research and Development Center for LLMs, NII, Japan
bowen.wu@atr.jp, ueno.haruto@irl.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp, carlos@atr.jp, cliu@nii.ac.jp
Abstract
Restoring natural (NL) speech from electrolarynx (EL) speech
is crucial for EL users who have undergone laryngectomy.
While previous works have shown the effectiveness of deep
learning methods for converting EL-to-NL speech with data
augmentation, time-aligned conversion remains underexplored,
where data scarcity is more severe due to temporal constraints.
We propose a data-driven learning framework to learn from
small-scale (13 minutes) EL speech data to synthesize time-
aligned EL speech from NL speech of multiple speakers, for
developing one-to-many EL-to-NL conversion models. Our
method leverages pretrained deep learning-based any-to-many
voice conversion (VC) models for finetuning on EL speech for
NL-to-EL conversion, to convert the NL speech in a large-scale
multi-speaker corpus to synthetic EL speech, which is used to
supervise a pretrained VC model for one-to-many EL-to-NL
VC. Experiments show the effectiveness of our method against
baselines in intonation and intelligibility.
Index Terms: Electrolarynx, voice conversion, deep learning,
synthetic data generation
1. Introduction
Laryngectomees (individuals who have undergone laryngec-
tomy) lose the ability to produce natural (NL) speech for effi-
cient communication. A common rehabilitation is the use of the
electrolarynx (EL), a handheld device that generates mechanical
vibrations to enable speech production [1]. However, EL speech
sounds unnatural due to its monotonous pitch and mechanical
excitation, which reduces communicative efficiency [2]. There
is a critical need for methods that can enhance the naturalness
and expressiveness of EL speech.
Recently, deep learning methods have been developed to
enhance EL speech. Kobayashi et al. [3, 4] proposed a deep
learning-based model to restore the acoustic features from
EL speech and used a source-filter vocoder to produce NL
speech, which outperforms traditional statistical voice conver-
sion techniques [5]. Self-supervised learning embeddings (e.g.,
WavLM [6]) were investigated for improving the quality of EL
speech [7]. Ma et al. [8, 9] utilized a text-to-speech model to
synthesize EL speech for creating a parallel NL/EL speech cor-
pus and developed a sequence-to-sequence model for EL-to-NL
(EL2NL) conversion.
While previous methods are cable of producing parallel NL
speech given EL speech, their time alignment has not been con-
sidered. In this work, we focus ontime-alignedconversion,
which we refer to as voice conversion (VC) throughout the pa-
per. VC only changes the voice of the speech and preserves the
linguistic content and certain prosodic characteristics such as
tempo. Moreover, we aim to construct one-to-many VC to con-
vert EL speech tomultipletarget voices, from which one can
choose [10, 11]. It is important to consider one-to-many VC for
EL speech since most of the EL users do not hold recordings of
their voices before the laryngectomy, so that they would be able
to select the closest voice from multiple target voices.
While deep learning-based VC [11] has the potential to be
adapted to EL2NL, the major challenge is the data scarcity of
EL speech. Kobayashi et al. [3] instructed healthy speakers to
produce NL speech by mimicking the prosodic characteristics
of EL speech. Chen at al. [7] aligned parallel NL/EL speech
using dynamic time warping based on manual word-level seg-
mentation. However, these approaches are not scalable, limiting
the utility of deep learning algorithms. While Yang et al. [12]
proposed a data augmentation method which flattens theF 0 of
NL speech as pseudo EL speech, the spectral features do not
match with those of EL speech, limiting the conversion quality.
To address this issue, we propose to learn from data to syn-
thesize time-aligned EL speech from NL speech, which can be
used to develop EL2NL conversion models. We finetune a pre-
trained deep learning-based any-to-many VC model on our col-
lected small EL speech corpus (13 minutes) in an unsupervised
fashion, which can convert the voice of a given NL speech to
EL without altering the linguistic content and certain prosodic
characteristics such as tempo. Crucially, this learning enables
the construction of the spectral features in the synthetic EL
speech, which reduces the discrepancy to the real EL speech
thus improving the conversion quality. Then, we convert speech
samples in a large-scale multi-speaker corpus to synthetic EL
speech, using which we finetune a pretrained any-to-many VC
model for one-to-many EL2NL VC. We compared our model
with existing baselines to show the efficacy of using our syn-
thetic data and the effectiveness of scaling up the data.
In summary, our contributions include: (1) We proposed a
data-driven learning framework that adapts any-to-many deep
learning-based VC to one-to-many EL2NL VC; (2) We demon-
strated that our model outperforms existing baselines thanks to
better spectral feature reconstruction; (3) We showed that scal-
ing up synthetic data leads to better performance, emphasiz-
ing the importance of synthetic data generation for EL speech.
Code and audio samples are available at our project page.
2. Methodology
Assuming there are available pretrained deep learning-based
any-to-many VC models for the desired language, our learn-
ing framework consists of the following three steps: (1) col-
lecting a small EL speech corpus; (2) finetuning the pretrained
VC model on the EL speech corpus for NL2EL VC and synthe-
sizing EL counterparts for an existing large-scale multi-speaker
6851
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2150
QVC finetuning
EL speech
synthesis
Pretrained
Whisper encoder
Content
encoder Flow
Decoder
Posterior
encoder
Discriminator
EL speech
NL speech Speaker
encoder
Predicted
speech
Finetuned
NL2EL QVC
EL
speech
Freeze Train Train & Inference Train only
LKL
LAdv + Lfm Lrecon
Figure 1:Overview of the proposed method. The architecture of QVC is shown in the block named QVC finetuning. During the
finetuning for NL2EL, the same EL speech is used as the input and the training target. During finetuning for EL2NL, the input to
whisper encoder is the synthetic EL speech, and the input to speaker encoder is its corresponding NL speech. During inference, we
input EL speech to Whisper encoder and NL speech to speaker encoder as the target voice.
speech corpus; (3) using the resulting NL/EL speech pairs to
finetune the pretrained VC model for EL2NL VC. An overview
of our method is illustrated in Fig. 1.
2.1. Pretraining Any-to-Many VC
We adopt QuickVC (QVC) [11] architecture (Fig. 1). QVC
supports any-to-many voice conversion and is designed for
fast inference. The model utilizes a variational autoencoder
(V AE) [13] to encode the input speech into a latent space.
The posterior encoder and decoder of the V AE employ con-
volution neural networks (CNN). The Whisper encoder [14]
extracts speaker-independent content features using CNN and
self-attention layers, while the speaker encoder focuses on cap-
turing speaker-specific characteristics. The CNN-based flow
module then combines the outputs of the speaker encoder and
the content encoder, mapping them into the latent representation
of the input speech. The discriminator also uses CNN to extract
features from speech, providing adversarial learning signal to
the generation modules. This structure facilitates converting the
voice of any input speech to many target voices. The model is
trained in an unsupervised fashion by using the same speech
as both the input and the training target. During inference, the
model synthesizes a speech whose content and voice correspond
to the input of the Whisper encoder and that of the speaker en-
coder, respectively.
For completeness, we show how QVC is trained in detail.
Denoting a batch of speech samples ass, the parameters of gen-
eration modules asθ, and the parameters of the discriminator as
ϕ, the loss function of training QVC is defined as follows:
LQVC(θ,s) = 1
N
NX
i=1
Lrecon(θ,si) +L KL(θ,si)
+L adv(θ,ϕ,s i) +L fm(θ,si),(1)
whereNrepresents the batch size and
Lrecon(θ,s) =||Mel-Spec(s)−Mel-Spec(G θ(s))||1,(2)
LKL(θ,s) = logq θ(z|s)−logp θ(z|s),(3)
Ladv(θ,s) = (D ϕ(Gθ(s)−1)) 2,(4)
Lfm(θ,s) = 1
L
LX
i=1
||Di
ϕ(s)−D i
ϕ(Gθ(s))||1,(5)
Ladv(ϕ,s) = (D ϕ(s)−1) 2 + (Dϕ(Gθ(s)))2,(6)
wheresis one sample ins, Mel-Spec represents the extrac-
tion of mel-spectrogram from speech waveform,qrepresents
the posterior encoder and the flow andprepresents the Whisper
encoder and the content encoder,Dis the discriminator andG
represents all generation modules,Lstands for the number of
discriminator layers in the feature matching loss [15].
While the original QVC was trained on VCTK [16] for En-
glish, we pretrained a QVC model for Japanese from sratch on
JVS corpus [17], a large-scale multi-speaker Japanese speech
corpus. We used the same hyperparameters as those used in
QVC. The resulting model can convert the voice for Japanese
speech samples.
2.2. Synthetic EL Speech Generation
To obtain a large-scale time-aligned NL/EL speech corpus for
supervising EL2NL VC, we convert the speech samples in JVS
corpus to synthetic EL speech as pair data. To achieve this, we
collected a small EL speech corpus to finetune the pretrained
QVC for NL2EL conversion.
We collected EL speech samples from one laryngectomee
participant (Japanese male speaker) who uses EL in his daily
life communication for more than 20 years. We adopted the
scripts from the 100 parallel speech samples in the JVS corpus
for the participant to speak, and recorded the produced speech
using a headset microphone (DPA 4060) in a soundproof room.
In total, we collected 100 EL speech utterances, i.e., one for
each script. The average length is around 8 seconds.
6852
Using the collected EL speech samples, we finetuned the
pretrained QVC while freezing the Whisper encoder using the
same loss function for training QVC and the same hyperparam-
eters. Then, we converted 12,998 speech samples in the JVS
dataset into synthetic time-aligned EL speech, forming NL/EL
speech pairs for subsequent supervised finetuning. Note that
this finetuned model is only used for synthesizing EL speech,
and is not used in the final VC system described in the follow-
ing sections.
2.3. Supervised Finetuning with Synthetic Data
We finetuned the pretrained QVC using the augmented NL/EL
speech pair by inputting the synthetic EL speech into the Whis-
per encoder and the corresponding NL speech into the speaker
encoder using the following objective function as supervision:
LKL(θ,s,s′) = 1
N
NX
i=1
logqθ(z|si)−logp θ(z|s′
i),(7)
whereNstands for number of samples within a batch,q θ rep-
resents the posterior encoder and flow, andp θ represents the
Whisper encoder and content encoder,sdenotes a batch of NL
speech,s′ denotes a batch of the corresponding EL speech. The
purpose is to reduce the the KL divergence between the output
of the content encoder and the flow network.
Since both inputs share the same linguistic content, the
model is expected to learn to convert the EL voice to NL voices
and reconstruct the intonation from EL speech features to match
the latent distribution of the corresponding NL speech. We up-
date only the content encoder and the flow module to utilize
the pretrained latent space of the V AE during QVC pretrain-
ing, which has already achieved high-quality conversion for NL
speech. Moreover, we freeze the speaker encoder during train-
ing. Since EL speech lacks natural intonation, updating the
speaker encoder may cause the model to learn to extract the
intonation features from the target NL speech, leading to unnat-
ural or inconsistent prosody in the output speech. By freezing
the speaker encoder, we ensure that it focuses solely on captur-
ing voice characteristics, without interfering with the intonation
reconstruction process.
3. Experiment
3.1. Experimental Setup
We used the same hyper-parameters as in QVC for pretrain-
ing, NL2EL finetuning, and EL2NL supervised finetuning for
290k, 90k, and 50k steps, respectively, by monitoring the con-
version quality. We used up to 10k pairs of the synthetic NL/EL
speech during training depending on situations mentioned later,
and used our collected EL speech samples for testing. All ex-
periments were performed on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090. The
whole training pipeline costs around 4 days. The inference of
audio samples with length around 10 seconds takes around 0.05
seconds.
3.2. Baseline
We name our full model asours-10kand use the following mod-
els as baselines:
• QVC [11]. QVC is trained to convert one voice to another;
thus it is possible that a pretrained QVC can be used directly
for EL2NL conversion by treating EL voice as the target.
• QVC-mix. The original QVC may fail because it has not
been exposed to EL voices. For a fair comparison, we fine-
tuned QVC for additional steps by including EL speech sam-
ples to expose the model to EL voices.
• flat-F 0 [12]. A previous method synthesizes time-aligned
pseudo EL speech by flatteningF 0 using PYWORLD
vocoder, but disregarding spectral features of EL speech. We
trained the model with flattenedF 0 data using the same set-
tings as ours-10k.
• ours-{100, 1k}. To investigate the effect of the amount of
data, we trained our model using 100, or 1,000 randomly
chosen samples out of the whole dataset. These models
were finetuned with the same settings as ours-10k except the
amount of used data.
3.3. Objective Evaluation
Following previous works in EL2NL conversion [3, 4, 7, 8, 9],
we use mel-cepstrum distortion (MCD), logF 0 root mean
squared error (RMSE), andF 0 correlation (CORR) to assess
the acoustic quality. For intelligibility, following in [9], we use
character error rate (CER) based on Whisper [14]. To measure
the quality of one-to-many VC, we use a model for voice em-
bedding called Resemblyzer [18] to compute voice similarity
following [11].
We first examine the quality of the synthesized EL speech
produced by our method. Our synthetic EL speech has lower
MCD compared toflat-F 0 (Table. 1) since it mimics the spec-
tral features. For example, it can be observed that the synthetic
EL speech resembles the true EL speech better thanflat-F0, par-
ticularly around the low frequency components and the fricative
and plosive consonants (Fig. 2).
flat-F0 [12] ours
MCD11.916 5.942
Table 1:MCD between EL speech and their synthetic counter-
parts generated by different methods.
MCDF 0 R.F 0 C. CER Sim.
QVC [11] 7.150 0.332 0.431 0.563 0.893
QVC-mix 9.017 0.716 0.088 0.682 0.591
flat-F0 [12] 6.885 0.337 0.548 0.373 0.916
ours-100 6.600 0.315 0.555 0.375 0.907
ours-1k6.5870.311 0.571 0.381 0.917
ours-10k 6.6070.309 0.585 0.366 0.923
Table 2:Objective evaluation results of different models.F 0 is
in log-scale. The best is in bold and the second is underlined.
R.: RMSE, C.: CORR, Sim.: voice similarity.
To assess the quality of EL2NL VC, we converted the col-
lected EL samples to NL speech to 5 target voices (3 male and 2
female) in the JVS corpus using different models. Results (Ta-
ble 2) show that (1) QVC training with EL speech samples de-
grades the performance; (2) even using minimal synthetic sam-
ples to finetune (i.e., ours-100) significantly outperforms the
original QVC, highlighting the necessity of pair data training;
(3) more data leads to better performance, which demonstrates
the effectiveness of using synthetic data; (4) the additional spec-
tral features introduced by our method enhanced the conversion
6853
	 
     
)&




('!/
	 
      
+(%""*%$*$*&(""")&
	 
     
)&- *"**$




('!/
	 
      
%$,(*)&*%#",% .%+()	!
	 
     
.$** )&.%+()	!




('!/
	 
      
%$,(*)&*%#",% .%+()	!




/




/




/
Figure 2:Spectrogram andF 0 contour (black dots) plots. X-axis represents time in seconds. Red rectangles indicate significantly better
spectral resemblance to the true EL speech (d), when synthesized by our method (c), in comparison to the flat-F0 (b).
quality, even when the amount of data is 100 times less (ours-
100 vs. flat-F 0). In addition, the voice similarity of ours-10k
is comparative to the one reported in QVC [11] (i.e., 0.857),
showing that our model succeeds in the conversion to multiple
target voices. Qualitatively, the converted speech by ours-10k
shows natural and different spectral patterns for different target
voices with similar temporal variations (Fig. 2).
3.4. Subjective Evaluation
Based on comparison mean opinion score (CMOS) [19], we
conducted a user study to evaluate the intonation naturalness
(N-CMOS) and intelligibility (I-CMOS) by comparing our
model against baseline models. We converted 15 EL speech
samples to a target speaker’s voice using different models and
instructed participants to compare the speech produced by our
model to each baseline. We also used mean opinion score to
evaluate voice similarity (S-MOS) [11] to confirm the one-to-
many conversion capability of our model. We converted 3 dif-
ferent EL speech samples to the voice of 5 target speakers using
our model. Participants compared each of them with a ground-
truth utterance from the same target speaker. As a reference, we
also compared 5 ground truth utterances with another one from
the same speaker.
We recruited 97 participants 1 through CrowdWorks2 (66
males and 31 females; average age: 42, SD = 8.4). N-CMOS
and I-CMOS (Table 3) show that our model achieved better in-
tonation naturalness and intelligibility than existing methods,
confirming the efficacy of synthetic data training and the effec-
tiveness of the additional spectral features. S-MOS (Table 4)
shows that our model achieved a certain level of voice similar-
ity, although there is still a room for improvement which can be
partially attributed to the imperfect intonation.
4. Discussion and Limitations
We proposed a data-driven learning framework to tackle the
data shortage problem in developing deep learning-based time-
aligned EL2NL VC models by leveraging pretrained any-to-
1This experiment involving human subjects was approved by
RIKEN Ethical Review Board (W2024-037).
2https://crowdworks.jp
QVC [11] flat-F 0 [12]
N-CMOS ∗0.54 ± 0.10 ∗0.28 ± 0.10
I-CMOS ∗0.57 ± 0.08 ∗0.15 ± 0.09
Table 3:CMOS for intonation naturalness and intelligibility.
Positive scores indicate preference for the proposed method
(ours-10k) over baselines. Scale is normalized to [-1, 1] and
0 indicates parity. The value following ± represents 95% confi-
dence interval.∗ :p<0.005.
Ground truth ours-10k
S-MOS4.51 ± 0.38 3.03 ± 0.44
Table 4:MOS for voice similarity. Scale is from 1 (definitely
different) to 5 (definitely the same). The value following ± rep-
resents 95% confidence interval.
many VC models and finetuning on small-scale data, resulting
in a model that converts EL speech to NL speech with more nat-
ural intonation and higher intelligibility than previous methods.
In addition, the model inherits the ability of converting to many
target voices, providing flexibility for EL users. By supporting
any-to-many conversion and removing the need for extensive
data gathering, our approach is promising for practical applica-
tions.
Despite these encouraging results, our model still faces two
main challenges. It struggles with unpronounceable sounds of-
ten present in EL speech, such as the phoneme /h/, and it gen-
erates only neutral intonation without reflecting the speaker’s
internal states or emotion. Addressing these limitations by im-
proving phoneme handling and incorporating expressive into-
nation will be the focus of future work. Nevertheless, this study
represents a concrete step toward restoring natural communica-
tion for individuals who have undergone laryngectomy.
5. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI (ChatGPT) has been used to improve the writing.
6854
6. Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by RIKEN Special Postdoc-
toral Researcher Program and JST Moonshot R&D under Grant
JPMJMS2011.