WSG: Clinically-Informed Weighted Speech Graphs for Dementia Detection
Yao Xiao ID 1,∗∗, Fritz Peters ID 1, Madhurananda Pahar ID 1, Dorota A Braun ID 2, Caitlin H
Illingworth ID 2, Stefan Goetze ID 1, Daniel Blackburn ID 2, Heidi Christensen ID 1
1 School of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
2 Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), University of Sheffield
{yxiao57, fpeters3, m.pahar, d.a.braun, chillingworth1, s.goetze, d.blackburn,
heidi.christensen}@sheffield.ac.uk
Abstract
Early detection of dementia is critical, yet clinical assessments
are often time-consuming and costly. Speech graphs offer a
scalable, automated approach by modelling utterances as graphs
to capture structural patterns that indicate cognitive decline.
While existing methods overlook crucial information such as
word meaning and pronunciation, this work proposes Weighted
Speech Graphs (WSGs), integrating clinically motivated at-
tributes into speech graphs, and presents a novel graph-derived
feature set for dementia detection. Remarkably, just one or two
features can achieve performance comparable to a full base-
line feature set, while providing interpretable insights aligned
with clinical observations. Furthermore, an open-source Python
framework for graph construction, feature extraction and visu-
alisation is released, promoting reproducibility and extensibil-
ity. Together, these advances bridge practical application and
clinical insights in speech graph-based dementia detection.
Index Terms: dementia, language analysis, speech graphs,
Cookie Theft, verbal fluency
1. Introduction
Dementia is a neurological condition characterised by pro-
gressive cognitive decline, which is often reflected in subtle
changes in spontaneous speech [1]. Language elicitation tasks
are widely used by clinicians to probe cognitive-linguistic func-
tion and therefore help in the diagnosis and monitoring of cog-
nitive conditions [1]. Common tasks include picture descrip-
tion [2], which elicits naturalistic speech describing a picture,
and verbal fluency [3, 4], which requires individuals to generate
words under specific constraints within a short time, e.g.60sec-
onds. Verbal fluency tasks can be further divided into Semantic
Verbal Fluency (SVF), which requires generating words within
a category (e.g. animals), and Phonemic Verbal Fluency (PVF),
which requires words starting with a specific letter (e.g. ‘p’).
The standard analysis of verbal fluency usually involves
counting the number of unique correct words, incorrect words
and repetitions [5, 6]. Individuals with dementia usually pro-
duce fewer correct words and more repetitions than healthy
older adults [5, 6] due to degraded lexical memory and exec-
utive function [7]. Another way to analyse verbal fluency is
through the speaker’s switching patterns [8, 9]. Switching refers
to transitions between clusters of related words (e.g., farm ani-
mals in an animal-naming SVF task, or rhyming words in a PVF
task) [10]. Being able to switch flexibly is an indicator of better
cognitive ability in fluency tasks, and individuals with dementia
tend to switch less in both SVF and PVF tasks [11, 10].
**indicates the corresponding author.
A tool that goes beyond the standard fluency analysis of
simply counting correct/incorrect/repeated words is Speech-
Graphs1 [12, 13], which represents word trajectory as a directed
graph of nodes (unique words) and edges (connections between
consecutive words), providing a way to quantify the structure
of word retrieval organisation. Topological features computed
from the graphs, such as loops, repeated edges, and several
connectivity metrics, have been found useful for analysing ver-
bal fluency responses for Alzheimer’s dementia (AD) [14] and
Parkinson’s [6, 15, 16], outperforming the standard fluency
analysis in distinguishing cognitive decline [6]. Study [14]
shows that compared to healthy individuals, graphs from the
dementia group are typically more connected (i.e. contain more
repetitions) and have fewer nodes (i.e. fewer unique words), as
illustrated in Figure 1.
lion
tiger
giraffe
elephant allig-
ator
croc-
odile
eagle
haddock
dog
cat
horse
donkey
lizard
dragonflymayfly
bee
owl
kite
Healthy
mouse
rat
horse sheep
goat
cow
monkeyape
fish
Dementia
Figure 1:Healthy individuals have a more linear, less con-
nected graph with more nodes. Examples are from animal SVF
task in CognoMemory [17, 18] (see Section 3.2).Visualisation
was produced by PyWSG, a framework developed in this work.
While prior studies using speech graphs have reported
promising performance, with an Area Under the Receiver
Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC) of0.875in detecting
AD [14], existing speech graphs only represent words as ab-
stract tokens, without accounting for word meaning or pronun-
ciation. As a result, speakers’ switching techniques between se-
mantic or phonemic clusters are not modelled by speech graphs,
despite its importance as a cognitive indicator [11, 10].
Apart from verbal fluency, speech graphs are also used to
analyse Cookie Theft Description (CTD) [19]. Cookie Theft [2]
is a widely used image for the picture description task, depict-
ing two children stealing cookies in a kitchen while a lady is
unaware. Participants are asked to describe everything they see
in the picture. CTD is commonly analysed based on a set of
core items and actions in the image, called Content Informa-
tion Units (CIUs) [20, 21], to quantify the informativeness of
the answer. Individuals with dementia have significantly fewer
mentions of CIUs [21, 22, 23, 24] and produce less efficient de-
scriptions of the picture, marked by more revisits of CIUs and
large transitions that jump across spatially distant CIUs in the
1https://neuro.ufrn.br/softwares/speechgraphs
5027
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2266
picture [24]. However, informative cues such as CIU count and
locations also remain unexploited in current speech graph ap-
proaches for CTD analysis [19].
To summarise, speech graphs can effectively capture the
structural patterns of word retrieval and flow of thought [14, 12],
but so far have no information about word meaning or pronun-
ciation (important for verbal fluencies [11, 10]) or which part
of the picture the word refers to (important for picture descrip-
tion [24]). This work addresses this limitation by proposing
Weighted Speech Graphs (WSGs), encoding semantic, phono-
logical, spatial, and temporal information directly as the graph’s
edge weights, allowing the resulting graph to reflect meaning-
ful relationships between words. Novel features derived from
the WSGs are introduced and evaluated for classifying demen-
tia cases from healthy individuals. Feature selection identifies
the most informative predictors, providing a better understand-
ing of dementia-associated patterns in cognitive task responses.
2. Weighted Speech Graphs for Dementia
The proposed WSGs are enhanced speech graphs with clinically
important attributes as edge weights. They are implemented
using PyWSG2, a Python framework developed as part of this
study for WSG construction, topological feature extraction, and
visualisation. The methods are described as follows.
2.1. Graph construction
2.1.1. Target word extraction
Prior speech graph studies in dementia construct graphs from
entire transcripts [19, 14]. However, this study hypothesises
that building graphs only from target words (i.e. correct words
in verbal fluencies and CIUs in CTD) would improve demen-
tia detection by providing a more focused representation of
thought organisation and inherently encoding the clinically rel-
evant counts of correct words or CIUs. In contrast, non-target
words such as filled pauses and interjections are often repeated
in speech, forming highly connected nodes that distort graph
connectivity. This hypothesis is later supported in Section 4.
A simple method is developed to extract target words from
the transcript. For the PVF task, target words are real words, as
identified using a spellchecker3, that begin with the letter ‘p’ in
the speaker’s response. For the SVF task, target words are the
words that have an animal meaning according to WordNet [25].
For the CTD tasks, the target words are CIUs, extracted using an
established dictionary of CIU key words 4 and synonyms [26].
This step converts the full transcript into a sequence of target
words in the order they are produced by the speaker.
2.1.2. Edge weights
A weighted, directed graph is constructed with NetworkX5 from
the target word sequence described in Section 2.1.1. Each node
represents a unique target word, and directed edges (i.e. node
transitions) connect words that occur consecutively in the tar-
get word sequence. Then, various task-relevant attributes are
extracted to be incorporated into the graph, distinguishing this
work from previous studies. For the verbal fluency tasks, se-
2https://github.com/yaoxiao1999/
weighted-speech-graphs
3https://pypi.org/project/pyspellchecker
4This study merges the ‘dishes’ CIU with ‘plate’, as the authors no-
ticed that they are often referring to the same item in the image.
5https://networkx.org
mantic and phonological embeddings of each target word are
obtained to capture switching behaviour [11, 10]. For the CTD
task, the coordinates of the CIUs in the image are used to model
spatial transitions [24]. Additionally, the temporal interval be-
tween consecutive target words is also measured, as timing can
also be a useful cue: individuals with dementia tend to produce
target words at a slower rate [27, 28]. Edges can be ‘weighted’
by these attributes. The edge weight, which is a numerical value
assigned to an edge that represents the strength or distance of
the relationship between two nodes, is calculated as the differ-
ence between consecutive words with respect to an attribute. In
this way, transitions between target words are augmented with
clinically meaningful information.
Edge weights are assigned so that the dementia-associated
patterns consistently map to larger or smaller values of the
weighted graph topological feature, depending on the feature
type (see end of Section 2.2). Accordingly, both distance and
similarity measures are computed for each attributes:
Semantic/Phonological Weights.ConceptNet Numberbatch
[29] is a set of word embeddings that combines ConceptNet
knowledge graph with distributional word embeddings, show-
ing superior performance compared to other popular word em-
beddings such as word2vec [30] and GloVe [31]. SoundVectors
[32] is a set of phonologically-informed embeddings for speech
sounds. The semantic or phonological distance between two
nodes is defined as the cosine distance between their Concept-
Net Numberbatch or SoundVectors embeddings. The semantic
or phonological similarity is computed as1−distance.
Spatial Weights.Each CIU is manually assigned two-
dimensional coordinates, using the locations specified in [33]
for the Cookie Theft image. Spatial distance is the Euclidean
distance between the coordinates of two consecutively named
CIUs, scaled to the range[0,1]by the maximum possible CIU
distance. Spatial similarity is computed as1−spatial distance.
Temporal Weights.The temporal distance between two con-
secutive words is defined as the difference in seconds between
the start time of the latter word and the end time of the former
word. Temporal similarity is calculated by 1
(1+temporal distance) .
2.2. Extraction of graph topological features
In the baseline study [14] to which the proposed work is com-
pared (see Section 3.1 for more details),13topological features
were measured from the speech graphs, of which5differed
significantly between the healthy control (HC) and dementia
groups in their in-house dataset. Our experiments identified the
same subset of significant features in two different datasets. For
brevity, only these significant features are presented here.
Some features (iv–vii described below) have both weighted
and unweighted versions. The unweighted versions correspond
to the traditional measures commonly used in the literature,
assuming that all edges have a uniform weight of one. The
weighted measures are computed using the weights described
in Section 2.1.2. Each feature is described below, and since dif-
ferent kinds of edge weights (semantic, phonological, etc.) are
only applied to certain cognitive tasks, for clarity, the features
analysed for the different tasks are summarised in Table 1.
(i) E: number of edges (for this study: number of connec-
tions between unique target words).(ii) N: number of nodes (for
this study: number of unique target words).(iii) Word Count
(WC): total number of words (for this study: total number of
target words). WC is not a graph topological feature, but is
nevertheless included in the baseline study [14].(iv) Diame-
ter: the maximum distance between any two nodes in a graph.
5028
Table 1:Features explored for different cognitive tasks.
Task Features
SVF, PVF N, E, WC,m (0),m (time),m (sem),m (phon)
CTD N, E, WC,m (0),m (time),m (spatial)
Note.m∈{diameter,ASP,density,ATD}. The superscript
specifies the weighting type, withm(0) denoting unweighted
features. Although not the primary drivers of their respec-
tive tasks, phonology also contributes to SVF and semantics
to PVF [34, 27] due to overlapping cognitive processes [35].
Therefore, both semantic and phonological weights are ex-
plored for both fluency tasks.
The unweighted distance is the number of edges in the short-
est path between two nodes, while the weighted distance is the
sum of edge weights along that path.(v) Average Shortest Path
Length (ASP): the distance from every node in a graph to ev-
ery other reachable node, averaged over all pairs of reachable
nodes.(vi) Density: the ratio of the number of edges in the
graph (or, for a weighted measure, the sum of the total edge
weights) to the number of possible edges. It measures how con-
nected the graph is relative to a complete graph.(vii) Average
T otal Degree (ATD): the total degree of a node is the total num-
ber of edges connected to it. The unweighted ATD of a graph
is the mean number of edges per node. The weighted ATD of a
graph is the mean sum of edge weights per node.
Individuals with dementia tend to have more densely con-
nected graphs, representing more revisits of nodes (i.e. repeated
words) [14]. Existing work [14, 6, 15] suggest that this stronger
connectivity is reflected in smaller diameters (nodes are con-
nected through many short, redundant links, rather than long,
minimally connected paths), smaller ASP (on average, fewer
steps are required to travel between pairs of nodes), larger den-
sity (more node pairs are connected), and larger ATD (nodes are
connected to more neighbours on average). Additionally, this
work aims to capture the dementia group’s decreased switch-
ing in fluency tasks, less spatially organised narration in pic-
ture description, and longer elapsed time between target words.
To preserve the expected directionality of each topological fea-
ture, diameter and ASP use distance weights for semantic and
phonological attributes, and similarity weights for temporal and
spatial attributes, so that smaller values indicate dementia. Con-
versely, density and ATD use similarity weights for semantic
and phonological attributes, and distance weights for temporal
and spatial attributes, so that larger values indicate dementia.
3. Experiments
3.1. Baseline
In [14],13graph topological features were extracted from SVF
transcripts in their in-house dataset via the SpeechGraphs tool.
A subset of5topological features, including N, E, density, di-
ameter, and ASP, plus a non-graph feature, WC, were signifi-
cantly different across HC and dementia groups. Using these
features with a Na ¨ıve Bayes (NB) classifier, the study [14] re-
ported an AUC of0.875for binary classification.
3.2. Data
Two datasets were used in this work: CognoMemory [17, 18]
and ADReSS [36]. Both datasets contain speech recordings of
the HC and dementia groups. The CognoMemory data used in
this study consists of audio recordings of participants perform-
ing three different tasks: an animal-naming SVF task, a letter
‘p’ PVF task, and a CTD task. An age- and gender-balanced
subset of this data was curated for this study, containing110
recordings (56dementia;54HC) collected from92individu-
als (38dementia;54HC), including follow-up assessments of
some participants. The mean age is75years for both groups.
The dementia group primarily consists of AD cases, with nine
recordings from five speakers diagnosed with either vascular de-
mentia or dementia with Lewy bodies. Since most of the record-
ings do not have manual transcripts, WhisperX [37] was used
with Whisper large [38] to generate timestamped transcripts
from the recordings.
The ADReSS dataset [36] is a classic benchmark dataset for
automatic AD detection, containing156audio recordings (78
AD;78HC) and respective time-stamped transcripts of partici-
pants performing the CTD task. It is age- and gender-balanced,
with the mean age of participants being66.5years. The manual
transcripts of participants’ speech were used, as the poor audio
quality hindered reliable automatic transcription and alignment.
3.3. Feature selection and classification
Binary classification was performed to differentiate between
the HC and dementia groups. For ADReSS data, the official
train/test split was used. Since CognoMemory does not have
a predefined split, stratified5-fold cross-validation was used.
Samples from the same participant never appeared in both train
and test folds. In line with the baseline, NB classifiers were
used. Evaluation metrics included AUC (for consistency with
the baseline) and F1-score (due to its common use in the field).
Feature selection was conducted to identify the most in-
formative features, enabling comparison between the proposed
weighted features and the baseline features, while also provid-
ing insights into which aspects of the data are most relevant for
dementia detection. CognoMemory was used for feature se-
lection, with nested cross-validation to avoid information leak-
age between feature selection and model evaluation. The se-
lected features were then applied to the ADReSS data to evalu-
ate cross-dataset generalisation. For each of the5folds (called
the outer folds) in CognoMemory, the non-test samples were
further divided into3inner folds used solely for feature selec-
tion. Sequential Forward Selection (SFS), which is one of the
most widely used feature selection methods [39], was used. SFS
starts from an empty set and iteratively adds features from the
candidate pool (see Table 1). At each step, each candidate fea-
ture is evaluated by joining the current feature set to train an NB
classifier on the inner train split and score on the inner held-out
validation split, averaged across all3inner folds. The selection
criterion is the mean of F1and AUC. The feature that maxi-
mally improves the current feature set is permanently added.
The search terminates when no candidate features improve the
criterion by more than a threshold of10 −3. As a result,5fea-
ture sets were selected by SFS for each of the5outer folds. To
evaluate model performance, an NB classifier was trained on
the outer training set using its corresponding selected feature
set and evaluated on the held-out outer test set. Final model
performance is reported as the mean across the5outer folds.
4. Results and analysis
Classification results are reported in Table 2. Compared to the
baseline condition, which uses all words in the transcript (con-
fig #1), restricting the input to target words (config #2) substan-
tially improves F1and AUC. This confirms the hypothesis that
focusing on target words will accentuate the speaker’s thought
5029
Table 2:Classification results of various baseline [14] and pro-
posed configurations of input words and feature sets.
Data Task # Input Feature Set F1AUC
CognoMemory
PVF
1all words, as in [14] as in [14]0.55 0.56
2target words only as in [14]0.75 0.75
3target words only all candidates0.72 0.75
4target words only SFS-selected0.77 0.76
5target words only final subset0.77 0.75
SVF
1all words, as in [14] as in [14]0.63 0.72
2target words only as in [14]0.74 0.80
3target words only all candidates0.73 0.78
4target words only SFS-selected0.72 0.76
5target words only final subset0.75 0.78
CTD
1all words, as in [14] as in [14]0.59 0.68
2target words only as in [14]0.65 0.74
3target words only all candidates0.56 0.69
4target words only SFS-selected0.63 0.66
5target words only final subset0.65 0.72
ADReSS
CTD
1all words, as in [14] as in [14]0.47 0.64
2target words only as in [14]0.73 0.77
3target words only all candidates0.70 0.75
5target words only final subset0.73 0.75
Note.All candidate features are listed in Table 1. Performance
using the SFS-selected features corresponds to the mean perfor-
mance across the5folds during SFS (i.e., the mean of Table 3).
The final subsets of features are highlighted in bold in Table 3.
process and, in turn, improve classification. This may partly ex-
plain why config #1underperforms relative to the AUC of0.875
reported in the baseline paper [14], whereas config #2substan-
tially narrows the gap: one possibility is that the in-house data
in [14] may contain a higher proportion of target words, resem-
bling the data represented by config #2.
Table 3 shows feature selection results using CognoMem-
ory. Most feature sets selected by SFS contain only one or two
features, often the proposed weighted features, indicating that a
small subset of the proposed features captures most of the infor-
mation for detecting dementia, and adding more features adds
little predictive value. In contrast, the baseline unweighted fea-
tures are rarely selected as important. When they are selected
(due to good performance on the inner folds), they do not gen-
eralise well to the outer folds (e.g. folds0and2for CTD in
Table 3). Table 2 shows that feature selection is effective: mod-
els trained on the SFS-selected subset (config #4) generally per-
form better than those using all candidate features (config #3)
and perform comparably to the baseline feature set (config #2),
despite using fewer features. For deployment, a final feature
set is proposed for each cognitive task as the feature set from
Table 3 that achieved the highest performance (highlighted in
boldface). For ADReSS, which was not used for feature se-
lection, performance was evaluated using this final feature set
(config #5). The results indicate that the features selected on
CognoMemory generalise to ADReSS, achieving performance
comparable to the baseline feature set (config #2) using only
two features. For completeness, CognoMemory was also eval-
uated on the final feature set (config #5), showing good results
using only one or two features.
Looking more closely at Table 3, diameter weighted by
phonological distance (diameter (phon)) alone is frequently cho-
Table 3:Selected feature sets and metrics scores for each outer
fold in the nested cross-validated SFS feature selection proce-
dure on CognoMemory. Best results are in boldface.
Task Fold Selected Feature Set F1AUC
PVF
0diameter (sem), diameter(0) 0.78 0.73
1diameter (phon) 0.83 0.87
2ASP (phon) 0.77 0.84
3diameter (phon) 0.87 0.84
4diameter (phon) 0.62 0.51
SVF
0diameter (time), ATD(sem) 0.74 0.78
1diameter (time), ATD(time), density(time),
density(sem), density(phon)
0.78 0.85
2density (time), density(phon) 0.60 0.66
3diameter (time), ASP(time), ATD(sem) , E 0.63 0.64
4diameter (time), ASP(time) 0.86 0.89
CTD
0ASP (0) 0.50 0.45
1ATD (spatial), WC 0.73 0.65
2diameter (0), E 0.53 0.61
3ASP (spatial), WC 0.80 0.87
4diameter (0), WC 0.60 0.72
sen for the PVF task. As expected, the mean diameter (phon) for
the dementia group (2.8) is shorter than for the HC group (5.3),
meaning that the mos