Universal Speech Content Factorization
Henry Li Xinyuan ID 2, Zexin Cai ID 2, Lin Zhang ID 2, Leibny Paola Garc´ıa-Perera ID 1,
Berrak Sisman ID 1, Sanjeev Khudanpur ID 1, Nicholas Andrews ID 2, Matthew Wiesner ID 2
1 Center for Language and Speech Processing, Johns Hopkins University, USA
2 Human Language Technology Center of Excellence (COE), Johns Hopkins University, USA
xli257@jhu.edu
Abstract
We propose Universal Speech Content Factorization
(USCF), a simple and invertible linear method for extracting
a low-rank speech representation in which speaker timbre is
suppressed while phonetic content is preserved. USCF ex-
tends Speech Content Factorization, a closed-set voice conver-
sion (VC) method, to an open-set setting by learning a uni-
versal speech-to-content mapping via least-squares optimiza-
tion and deriving speaker-specific transformations from only
a few seconds of target speech. We show through embedding
analysis that USCF effectively removes speaker-dependent vari-
ation. As a zero-shot VC system, USCF achieves competi-
tive intelligibility, naturalness, and speaker similarity compared
to methods that require substantially more target-speaker data
or additional neural training. Finally, we demonstrate that as
a training-efficient timbre-disentangled speech feature, USCF
features can serve as the acoustic representation for training
timbre-prompted text-to-speech models. Speech samples and
code are publicly available.1
Index Terms: V oice Conversion, Speech Factor Disentangle-
ment, TTS
1. Introduction
Recent self-supervised learning (SSL) models for speech, such
as WavLM, exhibit pronounced geometric structure in their fea-
ture spaces, with empirical analyses demonstrate that phonetic
content dominates feature variance, and that frames correspond-
ing to the same phoneme forming tight clusters across speak-
ers [1, 2]. This finding has significant consequences for the
downstream task of voice conversion (VC), where the typical
goal is to modify the speaker identity while preserving the lin-
guistic content, enabling a class of training-free voice conver-
sion methods that operate directly in SSL space [3, 4].
Notably, the voice conversion system kNN-VC [3] showed
that VC can be performed by replacing each WavLM feature
frame extracted from an input utterance with its nearest neigh-
bor from a target speaker’s WavLM feature collection. The suc-
cess of kNN-VC suggests a structural property of the WavLM
feature space: for each phoneme, frames from different speak-
ers reside within a consistent subspace. This hypothesis is sup-
ported further by LinearVC [4], which showed that a content-
preserving approximate linear projection can be found between
the WavLM features of two speakers. Building on this ob-
servation, Speech Content Factorization (SCF) [4] proposed
projecting WavLM features into a shared low-rank represen-
tation encoding phonetic content, and reconstructing speaker-
1Code release:https://github.com/HSTEHSTEHSTE/uscf;
Speech samples:https://hstehstehste.github.io/Projects/
uscf.github.io/index.html
Figure 1:Full pipeline for voice conversion using USCF .
Figure 2:Decomposing speech into a content-factorized form
through SCF .Xi are content-aligned WavLM features for dif-
ferent speakers. Content alignment forXi is performed through
kNN matching.
Figure 3:Left: formulation forW 1, one of our proposed
universal speech-to-content mappings. Right: Derivation of
speaker transformation matrixS 4 for unseen speaker4
specific features through learned linear transformations, thereby
enabling high-quality VC without additional model training.
Despite its simplicity and effectiveness, SCF is a closed-
set method: extracting a content-factorized representation from
a speaker requires that the speaker be included in the set of
speakers used to derive the factorization. This restriction limits
its applicability in downstream scenarios such as open-set VC
or timbre-prompted TTS, where unseen speakers must be sup-
ported without recomputing the decomposition. For example,
in order to train TTS models on crowd-sourced or web-crawled
datasets with diverse speaking styles such as CommonV oice [5]
7575
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-198
or Emilia [6], training SCF on all of the speakers present would
both be prohibitively expensive, and exclude many speaker that
don’t have enough speech present.
To address this limitation, we proposeUniversal Speech
Content Factorization (USCF), an open-set extension of SCF
that enables speaker-agnostic content extraction and one-shot
speaker adaptation. Leveraging the linear structure of SCF,
we derive a speaker-agnostic universal speech-to-content map-
ping via least-squares optimization, and infer speaker-specific
content-to-speech transformations from as little as a single
target-speaker utterance using linear estimation. Our system
achieves competitive performance compared to SSL-structure-
based baselines and to SCF. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose USCF, a universal speech-to-content mapping,
by showing that the linear structure underlying SCF gener-
alizes to unseen speakers. We show that a universal speech-
to-content mapping can be computed using a simple least-
square formulation, while speaker-specific content-to-speech
transformations can be estimated from only a few seconds of
target speech.
• We evaluate USCF as a zero-shot VC system and show
competitive performance in intelligibility, naturalness, and
speaker similarity compared to baselines.
• We further show that the USCF representation can serve as an
alternative acoustic target for text-to-speech (TTS) systems.
• We perform embedding analyses on USCF representations
and show that they contain less speaker information than
other speaker-factorized representations while effectively
preserving speech content.
1.1. Related Works: Speech Disentanglement
In contrast to SSL-space methods, most speech disentanglement
approaches rely on explicitly trained generative models. A com-
mon strategy is to use a Variational Autoencoder (V AE) [7] that
reconstructs speech from a bandwidth-limited intermediate rep-
resentation encoding one factor, together with an auxiliary en-
coder that provides the disentangled factor [8–13]. Such meth-
ods have been applied to VC [14–16], expressive speech trans-
lation [17], speech anonymization [18, 19], and accent conver-
sion [20–22], but require additional model training and substan-
tial speaker-specific data.
2. Universal Speech Content Factorization
Speech Content Factorization (SCF) jointly decomposes
content-aligned WavLM features from multiple speakers into
a shared low-rank representation encoding phonetic content,
enabling high-quality VC without additional model training.
However, SCF is a closed-set method, as both content extrac-
tion and reconstruction require speaker-specific transformation
matrices obtained during the original factorization. In this sec-
tion, we extend SCF to an open-set setting.
2.1. Closed-Set SCF
VC through SCF, as proposed in [4], is performed as follows:
1. Selectkspeakers, each with sufficient speech for k-nearest-
neighbor (kNN) matching (e.g., at least5minutes).
2. For some anchor speakeri∈[1..k]and associated speech
WavLM framesX i of shapen(number of speech frames)
byd(WavLM feature dimension), find matching WavLM
framesX j using nearest neighbors for each speakerj∈
[1..k], j̸=i. Stack the matricesX 1 throughX k along their
feature dimensions to produceXof shape(n, kd).
3. Perform rank-r-truncated Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) onX, givingX≈UΣS. We writeC=UΣof
shape(n, r)as the content-factorized representation ofX.
We further splitSof shape(r, kd)into chunksS 1 through
Sk, each of size(r, d), such that∀j∈[1..k],X j ≈CS j.
It follows thatX jS†
j≈C, whereS †
j is the Moore-Penrose
inverse ofS j. We refer toS j as thespeaker transforma-
tion matrixof speakerj. The content factorization process is
shown in figure 2.
4. For speakerss, t∈[1..k]and input speechX ′
s, perform VC
by ˆX′t≈X′
sS†
sSt.
2.2. Approaches for Universal Speech to Content Mapping
To extend SCF to unseen speakers, we seek:
1. A matrixW, such that for any speakermand unseen speech
X′
m, including those speakersmnot in[1..k],X ′
mW≈C ′.
2. For a small number of WavLM framesX ′
m from an unseen
speakerm, derive the speaker transformation matrixS m cor-
responding to speakerm.
Recall the truncated SVD formulationX≈UΣS. We
can solve the least-squares optimization problemW 0 =
arg minW
Pk
j=1||XjW−C||, which directly attempts to re-
construct the content-factorized representationC=UΣ, to
findW 0. However, in preliminary experiments, we found
thatW 0 does not produce representations that can be reliably
mapped back to the WavLM feature space to synthesize intelli-
gible speech. We observe that therorthonormal columns of the
nbyrmatrixUrepresent therdimensions of speech content
according to this factorization, the magnitude of each of these
dimensions in the WavLM feature space is represented by the
corresponding diagonal singular values ofΣ. If we assume that
allrcontent dimensions should be treated as equally important,
independent of their singular values, thenΣshould be factored
out of the optimization target, as shown in figure 3. This leads
to the modified optimization problem onU:
W1 = arg min
W
kX
j=1
||XjWΣ−1−U||(1)
UsingUdirectly as the optimization target may amplify
acoustic contexts that are over-represented in the data. To avoid
this, we instead find a matrixW2 that approximately inverts the
speaker transformations themselves:
W2 = arg min
W
kX
j=1
||SjW−I||(2)
Finally, the formulation forW 3 relies on the simplifying
assumption that content and timbre components are linearly
separable:X j =C(T content +S j
timbre), whereT content speaker-
invariant, and its columns orthogonal toS j
timbre. Under this as-
sumption we have:
SiS†
j = (T content +S i
timbre)(Tcontent +S j
timbre)† (3)
= (T content +S i
timbre)((Tcontent)† + (Sj
timbre)†)(4)
=T content(Tcontent)† +S i
timbre(Sj
timbre)† (5)
≈T content(Tcontent)† =I(6)
Steps 4 and 5 follow from the assumption of orthogonality
of the column spaces ofT content andS j
timbre, while step 6 uses
the fact that the timbre subspaces of different speakers, being
7576
Table 1:Comparisons of USCF VC with baseline systems ac-
cording to objective metrics. Color intensity reflects metric di-
rectionality.
Method WER (%)↓UTMOS↑Spk Sim↑
USCFW 1 2.70 2.805 0.524
USCFW 2 4.04 2.519 0.557
USCFW 3 2.31 2.826 0.420
kNN-VC 3.16 2.855 0.666
LinearVC 2.69 2.765 0.621
SCF 2.18 2.886 0.603
SCFW 1 3.01 2.859 0.604
SeedVC 6.24 3.173 0.532
Table 2:Comparison of subjective metrics between USCF and
baselines. Mean scores with95%intervals.
Method MOS (%)↑SMOS (%)↑
original 3.80±0.17 4.29±0.15
USCFW 1 3.42±0.17 3.00±0.23
USCFW 1 100s 3.66±0.17 2.94±0.29
kNN-VC 3.53±0.18 3.29±0.25
LinearVC 3.65±0.16 3.17±0.21
SCF 3.63±0.18 3.08±0.25
SeedVC 3.36±0.18 2.77±0.31
high-dimensional, are likely orthogonal. Thus we can pickW 3
simply as the Moore-Penrose inverse of any speakeriin[1..k]:
W3 =S†
i for somei∈[1..k]
2.3. Speaker Transformation Matrix Derivation
Suppose we have a speakerm /∈[1..k]. To reconstruct
speaker-mspeech from a content representationC, we require
the corresponding speaker transformation matrixS m such that
Xm ≈CS m. Suppose also that we are given a small set of
WavLM featuresX ′
m from speakerm. Using the facts that
X′
m ≈C ′Sm andC′ ≈X ′
mW, we can deriveS m using
the following formulation, also shown in figure 3:
Sm≈(X′
mW)†X′
m (7)
3. Experimental setup
3.1. Test Data
For our VC experiments, we select4non-overlapping sets of
20speakers from LibriSpeech [23]: source speakers (from test-
clean), target speakers (from test-other), held-out 1 (from test-
clean), and held-out 2 (from dev-clean). For each of the source
speakers, we randomly choose20utterances for testing, and5
target speakers as the conversion target.
3.2. USCF-VC Details
Following the procedure outlined in section 2.1, we choose1
speaker in dev-clean as our anchor speaker. The40speakers
included in the SVD process are drawn from held-out 1 and
held-out 2. After constructing the content-aligned WavLM ma-
trixX, we chooser= 75and perform rank-r-truncated SVD
onX, giving usW 1 andW 2 by following equations 1 and 2.
We setW 3 as the pseudoinverse ofS i corresponding to a dif-
ferent random speakeriacross10runs, and report average per-
formance. For each target speaker, we randomly sample from
their utterances and retain the WavLM feature frames extracted
from each sample utterance until we reach500frames (corre-
sponding to10seconds of speech). We then derive their speaker
transformation matrix according to equation 7.
3.3. Baselines
We include the following baselines: kNN-VC [3], LinearVC
[4], and closed-set SCF, as these can be seen as different meth-
ods of exploiting the unique structure of the WavLM feature
space. We also benchmark it against SeedVC [24], a diffusion
transformer-based zero-shot VC method with state-of-the-art
performance. For kNN-VC and LinearVC, we make all source
and target speaker speech (roughly8minutes per speaker) avail-
able for kNN matching and for finding source-target WavLM
feature mappings. For SCF, we perform our SVD on all40
speakers from the source and target speaker sets from section
3.1, giving usS i for each speakeriamong the source and target
speakers.
3.4. Metrics
We include the following objective metrics: ASR WER (us-
ing Whisper [25] large 2) for intelligibility; UTMOS-v2 [26] 3
as a proxy for quality; speaker embedding cosine similarity
to an averaged ground-truth speaker embedding, with embed-
dings extracted from a pre-trained ECAPA-TDNN [27]4. Target
Equal Error Rate, where a speaker ID system tries differentiate
ground-truth targe speaker utterances from voice-converted tar-
get speaker utterances, are not reported due to space constraints,
as they show identical relative performance across systems to
speaker embedding cosine similarity. We further run human
evaluations on USCF and comparative systems, where we col-
lect a Mean Opinion Score (MOS) based on the naturalness and
quality of each output utterance, and a Speaker Similarity Mean
Opinion Score (SMOS) based on the similarity of each output
utterance to a reference utterance.
4. Results
4.1. V oice Conversion Quality
Objective evaluation results for voice conversion are presented
in table 1. We note that USCF excel at content preservation,
and is capable of producing natural-sounding speech. Speaker
similarity tests show that while USCF is able to produce speech
that is highly similar to the target speaker, the level of simi-
larity is somewhat weaker than those of kNN-VC, LinearVC,
and SCF. In order to investigate the source of this degradation,
we compare USCF with partially open-set SCF, where the input
speech comes from speakers that are out-of-domain while the
target speakers are in-domain. We find that partially open-set
SCF achieves speaker similarities that are on par with closed-
set SCF, suggesting that the content-to-speaker transformation
is the source of the degradation in speaker similarity of USCF.
Subjective evaluation results, shown in table 2, demon-
strate that listeners show no statistically significant preference
towards USCF or any of the other baseline systems except
SeedVC, which was least favored.
Among the speech-to-content mapping strategies, we found
thatW 2 achieves the best target speaker similarity at the price
of reduced speech quality and content preservation, whereas
2huggingface.co/openai/whisper-large
3huggingface.co/sarulab-speech/UTMOSv2
4huggingface.co/speechbrain/spkrec-ecapa-voxceleb
7577
Table 3:Speaker ID using same-phoneme embeddings.
Model Rank Spk EER↑Phoneme EER↓
USCF 7536.40%11.43%
USCF 1024 35.33% 11.43%
WavLM 1024 21.77% 11.56%
ContentVec 792 27.98%8.82%
WavLM - kNN 1024 35.14% 12.70%
Table 4:VC performance of USCF across different ranks.
Rank WER (%)↓UTMOS↑Spk Sim↑
100 2.77 2.81 0.504
75 2.70 2.805 0.524
50 2.69 2.738 0.529
30 2.96 2.607 0.513
20 3.98 2.388 0.489
W3 shines at content preservation but struggles with target
speaker similarity; by contrast,W 1 finds a reasonable balance
between all metrics. For USCF usingW 3 as the universal
speech-to-content mapping, we report the average performance
over10runs, whereW 3 was chosen to be the pseudoinverse of
a different randomly-selected SCF speaker transformation ma-
trix. Over the10runs, the standard deviation for ASR WER
and UTMOS are0.10%and0.015, respectively, suggesting that
W3 is highly stable regardless of the choice of SCF speaker
transformation used to derive it.
4.2. Speaker ID within Phoneme
To test the claim that USCF features preserve speech content in-
formation while removing speaker-identifying information, we
first extract USCF features (rank75,W 1) from the TIMIT [28]
dataset TEST split, then perform the following:
1. Phoneme recognition. Ground truth phoneme labels for each
test frame are inferred using TIMIT’s time-phoneme align-
ment. Classification is performed by taking the argmin cosine
distance to each reference phoneme embedding.
2. Speaker recognition per-phoneme. For each phoneme, we
find all the frames from TIMIT TEST with the corresponding
phoneme label, then perform speaker ID on feature vectors
corresponding to these frames.
We compare USCF to two SSL-based baselines: WavLM
and ContentVec, shown in table 3. We found that USCF is on
par with WavLM as a phoneme classifier, and that it is stronger
than both WavLM and ContentVec when it comes to remov-
ing speaker information. This property still holds even when
the rank of USCF is increased to1024, showing that the loss
of speaker information is not an artifact of projecting into a
low-dimensional space. We additionally find that USCF is still
marginally better at speaker information removal and at content
preservation than WavLM features that had been normalized to
a single reference speaker through kNN matching.
4.3. Ablations
4.3.1. Reduction in Rank
A comparison of the performance of USCF at various ranks can
be found in table 4. We find that USCF is stable when its rank is
within50and100, but that the synthetic voice quality declines
when its rank drops further.
Table 5:VC performance of USCF when output output speaker
transformation matrix is derived with different number of
frames of target speaker speech.
Num frames WER (%)↓UTMOS↑Spk Sim↑
10000 2.28 2.935 0.564
5000 2.42 2.923 0.564
2000 2.47 2.915 0.564
1000 2.51 2.904 0.546
500 2.70 2.805 0.524
200 4.94 2.431 0.42
Table 6:TTS models trained using different target features.
Fbank (normalized) is where each utterance is first normalized
to the same voice using kNN-VC [3], then converted into Fbank
features.
Target Features ASR WER↓Epochs UTMOS-v2↑
USCF features 11.44% 25 2.881
mel 27.93% 39 2.741
mel (normalized) 11.92% 33 2.732
4.3.2.SDerivation with Fewer or More Frames
Table 5 shows the performance of USCF when the amount of
target speaker speech used for deriving the target speaker trans-
formation matrix is varied. We notice a sharp degradation in
target speaker similarity when the amount of target speaker
speech falls below500frames, corresponding to10seconds;
conversely, target speaker similarity improves when the amount
of target speaker speech is increased, but see diminishing re-
turns beyond2000frames (40seconds).
4.4. TTS Using a Content-Factorized Representation
We verify that USCF features can be used as target training
features with a flow-matching TTS model, trained on Lib-
riSpeech and following the architecture and training strategies
from ZipV oice [29]. We compare it to two benchmarks: a TTS
model trained on mel filterbank features, and one trained on
mel filterbank features extracted from utterances that had been
voice-normalized to a single speaker using kNN-VC. Table 6
show that the model trained with USCF features achieves bet-
ter WER while requiring less training time than both models
trained with mel filterbank features.
5. Conclusion
We propose USCF, a method for extracting content-preserving
and speaker-agnostic features from WavLM features using a
simple linear transformation. We extend an existing closed-set
method for linear factorization of WavLM features, SCF, into an
open-set method, transforming it into a zero-shot voice conver-
sion system. We show through embedding analysis that USCF
features effectively preserve content information, and that they
carry less speaker information than existing methods such as
ContentVec. We also demonstrate the potential for using USCF
features on downstream tasks such as TTS training. In our fu-
ture work, we would like to explore if simple neural methods
would allow for a more stable version ofW, or a derivation of
Sm for unseen speakermwith even less speech from speaker
mavailable. We also plan to utilize USCF to train zero-shot
style-conditioned TTS systems that are timbre-agnostic.
7578
6. Generative AI Disclosure
Generative AI was used for the following in this work:
1. Conversion of table formats.
2. Limited language polishing of the Introduction section.
7. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Office of the Director of Na-
tional Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA), via the ARTS Program under con-
tract D2023-2308110001. The views and conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or
implied, of ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S.
Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints
for governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright an-
notation therein.