RobustSpeechFlow: Learning Robust Text-to-Speech Trajectories via
Augmentation-based Contrastive Flow Matching
Jinhyeok Yang1, Hyeongju Kim†2, Yechan Yu1, Joon Byun1, Frederik Bous1, Juheon Lee1
1 Supertone Inc., Republic of Korea
2 Out of Set Inc., Republic of Korea
hello@yangyangii.world, juheon@supertone.ai
Abstract
While flow-matching text-to-speech (TTS) achieves strong
zero-shot speaker similarity and naturalness, it remains sus-
ceptible to content fidelity issues, particularly skip and repeat
errors from imperfect alignment. We propose RobustSpeech-
Flow, a training strategy that improves alignment robustness
by extending contrastive flow matching with length-preserving
repeat and skip latent augmentations. Requiring no external
aligners or preference data, our method directly penalizes real-
istic failure modes and readily integrates into existing pipelines.
On Seed-TTS-eval, it reduces the word error rate (WER) from
1.44 to 1.38 using only 0.06B parameters. On our ZERO500
benchmark, it delivers consistent intelligibility improvements
across diverse speaker and prosody conditions; at NFE=24,
it reduces English character error rate (CER) from 0.48% to
0.35% and Korean CER from 0.81% to 0.57%. Audio samples:
https://robustspeechflow.github.io/.
Index Terms: text-to-speech, zero-shot TTS, flow matching,
alignment robustness, contrastive learning
1. Introduction
In text-to-speech (TTS), the primary requirement iscontent fi-
delity: the system must render the intended text accurately. In
production, failures such as word or phraserepetitionandskip-
pingare not minor artifacts; they materially reduce reliability
and can create safety and compliance risks. As modern gener-
ative TTS systems continue to improve naturalness and expres-
sivity, robust text–speech alignment remains a central problem.
Recent progress in non-autoregressive TTS has increas-
ingly been driven by flow-matching-based latent generation.
DiTTo-TTS shows that large-scale diffusion transformers can
achieve strong zero-shot quality without relying on domain-
specific factors such as phonemes or phoneme durations, high-
lighting the value of scalable latent modeling and cross-
attention-based alignment [1]. F5-TTS further demonstrates
that flow matching with a DiT backbone can simplify the
pipeline by removing explicit duration modeling and alignment
modules while retaining high quality and robustness [2]. At
the efficiency end of the spectrum, SupertonicTTS shows that
compact flow-matching TTS can be practical for deployment,
but also makes clear that content stability becomes increasingly
difficult under tight capacity and latency constraints [3].
In parallel, the integration of autoregressive language mod-
eling with diffusion processes [4] has catalyzed a new wave
of highly expressive speech generation. Building upon this
paradigm, recent systems such as DiTAR [5], V oxCPM [6],
†This work was conducted while the author was with Supertone
Inc.
and VibeV oice [7] have substantially improved zero-shot qual-
ity and contextual naturalness. While these advances broaden
the scope of generative speech modeling, they do not reliably
resolve the issue of content fidelity. In practice, both pure flow-
matching architectures and hybrid LM-diffusion systems con-
tinue to exhibit alignment errors. Crucially, these skip and re-
peat failures tend to become more severe as model capacity is
constrained or the number of function evaluations (NFE) is re-
duced during inference [2, 3, 5]. Furthermore, as speech gen-
erative modeling is scaled with increasingly large and diverse
ASR-curated corpora such as GigaSpeech and Emilia [8, 9], en-
suring robust quality control and alignment becomes even more
critical.
Several directions have been explored to mitigate this mis-
alignment. At the architectural level, explicit conditioning and
guidance can improve low-step stability; for instance, Dual-
Speech uses a phoneme-level latent diffusion formulation with
multiple classifier-free guidance signals to stabilize generation
at low NFE [10]. Similarly, stronger architectures and pre-
trained representations can improve overall robustness, but they
do not eliminate skip and repeat failures altogether [1]. Beyond
architectural modifications, preference-based approaches con-
struct dedicated intelligibility datasets and apply post-training
objectives such as DPO to penalize failure cases [11, 12]. Other
approaches introduce auxiliary supervision from recognition or
metric-optimization models, for example ASR- or CTC-derived
objectives that directly penalize content errors [13]. While ef-
fective, these strategies either require costly data curation or in-
troduce additional models and training complexity, which is un-
desirable for lightweight deployment settings.
We proposeRobustSpeechFlow, a simpletraining strategy
forcontrastive flow matching in TTSthat improves alignment
robustness without additional models or datasets. Our key idea
is to convert common TTS failure modes intohard negatives
in latent space: we synthesize skip- and repeat-like target la-
tents with length-preserving overwrites and train the model con-
trastively so that the correct latent trajectory is preferred over
these corrupted alternatives. This directly aligns the contrastive
signal with the failure patterns that matter in practice while re-
maining compatible with standard flow-matching training.
The main contributions are as follows.
• We introduce RobustSpeechFlow, a speech-specific
contrastive flow-matching training strategy that targets
skip/repeat failures via simple latent-space augmentations.
• The proposed method requires no preference dataset, no ex-
ternal aligner or ASR model, and readily integrates into FM-
TTS pipelines with minimal overhead.
• We demonstrate consistent improvements on both a public
zero-shot benchmark and a new multilingual benchmark with
6916
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-3086
higher speaker, prosody, and text diversity, especially under
low-NFE inference.
2. Background
2.1. Alignment Robustness
Alignment errors have been a persistent challenge since early
deep-learning-based TTS. Tacotron 2 improves attention sta-
bility with location-sensitive attention [14]. Deep Convolu-
tional TTS (DCTTS) introduces a guided-attention loss and a
forced-incremental attention heuristic at synthesis time to miti-
gate skipped or repeated characters [15]. Despite these efforts,
skip/repeat failures remain common, especially for long or out-
of-distribution text.
Recent work has explored post-training and auxiliary-
guidance approaches. Preference-based methods construct tar-
geted failure cases and apply direct preference optimization
(DPO) training [11, 12]. Other approaches introduce auxil-
iary objectives, such as CTC-based ASR supervision, to di-
rectly penalize content errors [13, 16]. Alternatively, leveraging
strong pretrained text and speech representations (e.g., ByT5
and SpeechT5) has been shown to inherently improve alignment
stability, as demonstrated in DiTTo-TTS [1].
While positional encodings like LARoPE [17] provide a
practical lever to improve alignment under duration variation,
RobustSpeechFlow operates orthogonally: we reshape train-
ing using failure-mode contrastive negatives without introduc-
ing new models or external supervision.
2.2. Contrastive Learning and Hard Negatives
Contrastive learning has been widely used to improve discrimi-
native representations by bringing positives closer and pushing
negatives apart [18, 19]. In practice, the usefulness of the con-
trastive signal depends strongly on negative construction: hard
negatives that remain close to the anchor but violate the condi-
tioning semantics often provide a stronger gradient than easy,
unrelated negatives.
This idea has recently been extended to generative model-
ing. Contrastive Flow Matching (CFM) [20], originally intro-
duced for image generation, augments the standard conditional
flow-matching objective with contrastive regularization terms
computed from mismatched conditions. Concretely, it keeps
the predicted vector field aligned with the positive transport di-
rection while separating it from negative transport directions in-
duced by incorrect conditions. This improves condition selec-
tivity during training without changing the FM inference proce-
dure.
RobustSpeechFlow adapts this framework to speech gen-
eration and fundamentally strengthens the negative formula-
tion for TTS. Rather than relying on random condition mis-
matches, we construct same-utterance latent corruptions that re-
main acoustically plausible while explicitly breaking local text–
speech alignment.
3. RobustSpeechFlow
3.1. Preliminaries: Conditional Flow Matching
Letx∈R C×T be a continuous latent speech sequence pro-
duced by theSupertonic speech autoencoder[3], and letcde-
note conditioning inputs (text and optional speaker prompt).
We use a standard linear probability path for conditional flow
matching:
ϵ∼N(0,I), t∼U(0,1), x t = (1−t)ϵ+tx.(1)
The target velocity isv(x,ϵ) =x−ϵ. We train a neural vector
fielduθ(xt,t,c)with
Lpos =E

∥uθ(xt,t,c)−v(x,ϵ)∥ 2
2

.(2)
3.2. Baseline: Contrastive FM with Random Negatives
A simple contrastive extension samples a negative latentx −
rand
from another batch item and introduces a contrastive regular-
ization term based on the corresponding negative velocity:
Lrand =E

∥uθ(xt,t,c)−v(x −
rand,ϵ)∥ 2
2

.(3)
This term is subtracted in the final objective. In TTS, random
negatives may be semantically unrelated to the conditioning text
and thus fail to target alignment errors directly.
3.3. TTS Failure-mode Negatives via Latent Augmentation
TTS systems that lose alignment often repeat a pronunciation,
word, or short clause, or skip a local text span altogether.
We therefore constructTTS failure-mode negativesby perturb-
ing theground-truthlatent sequence while keeping the overall
length fixed. This design is important in practice: variable-
length corruption complicates batch construction and destabi-
lizes training in a fixed-length latent pipeline.
For each utterance, we first choose the augmentation type
m∈{rep,skip}withPr(m=rep) = Pr(m=skip) = 0.5.
We then sample a coverage budgetκ:κ∼U(0.2,0.4)for re-
peat andκ∼U(0.4,0.8)for skip. Within the chosen mode, we
repeatedly sample span lengths uniformly between the frame
counts corresponding to 0.1 and 5.0 seconds and apply edits un-
til the cumulative modified coverage would exceed the sampled
budget.
3.3.1. Repeat Augmentation
We first initialize the negative latent as a copy of the original
sequence,x−
rep =x. We then sample a source span[s,s+ℓ)
and a different target startkwithk+ℓ≤T, and overwrite the
target region with the source content:
x−
rep[k:k+ℓ]←x[s:s+ℓ],s.t.s̸=k.(4)
By overwriting a target region rather than appending duplicated
frames, this approach strictly preserves the original sequence
length. Moreover, because the original content at the target span
is overwritten, this operation inherently induces a simultaneous
skip error, effectively simulating the composite repeat-and-skip
failures frequently observed in real-world TTS misalignment.
3.3.2. Skip Augmentation
Similarly, we initialize the negative latent as a copy of the orig-
inal sequence,x−
skip =x. We sample a skip start indexs 1 and a
skip lengthℓ. To simulate a local skip, we shift the subsequent
latent sequence forward to overwrite the skipped region:
x−
skip[s1 :T−ℓ]←x[s 1 +ℓ:T].(5)
After shifting the sequence, the remainingℓframes at the tail of
the utterance ([T−ℓ:T]) are replaced with a precomputed si-
lence latentx sil. By shifting the future context and padding with
silence rather than explicitly deleting frames, this approach sim-
ulates a realistic skip error while strictly preserving the global
sequence duration.
6917
Algorithm 1Training step of RobustSpeechFlow
Require:Batch of audioa, Text conditionsc, Hyperparameters
λrand,λ aug
1:x←Encoder(a)▷Extract speech latent representation
2:ϵ∼N(0,I),t∼U(0,1)▷Sample Gaussian noise and
time step
3:x t←(1−t)ϵ+tx ▷Construct flow matching trajectory
4:v pos←x−ϵ ▷Target vector field (Positive)
5:x rand←RollBatch(x)▷In-batch random negative sample
6:v rand←x rand−ϵ ▷Vector field towards random negative
7:x aug←Augment(x)▷Same-length failure-mode negative
8:v aug←x aug−ϵ▷Vector field towards augmented negative
9:u θ←Model(x t,t,c)▷Predict vector field
10:L pos←∥u θ−v pos∥2
2 ▷Standard FM loss
11:L rand←∥u θ−v rand∥2
2 ▷Contrastive reg. (Random)
12:L aug←∥u θ−v aug∥2
2 ▷Contrastive reg. (Hard)
13:L total←L pos−λ randLrand−λ augLaug ▷Total objective
14:returnL total ▷Update model parameters via gradient
descent
3.3.3. Implementation Details
These negatives remain close to the original utterance in speaker
identity and acoustic texture, but they corrupt local text–speech
correspondence. They are therefore substantially harder and
more relevant to the conditioning text than random batch neg-
atives. For implementation convenience, the silence latentx sil
used to pad the tail of the skip negatives is simply precomputed
by encoding a zero-padded waveform with the codec and re-
peating the resulting latent frames to the required length.
The augmentation-based contrastive regularization is de-
fined as:
Laug =E

∥uθ(xt,t,c)−v(x −
aug,ϵ)∥ 2
2

,(6)
wherex−
aug∈{x−
rep,x−
skip}denotes the corrupted latent produced
by the chosen augmentation mode.
3.4. Overall Objective
The overall training objective combines the positive flow-
matching loss with the contrastive regularization terms:
L=L pos−λ randLrand−λ augLaug.(7)
4. Experimental Setup
4.1. Training Data
We train on internal corpora of approximately 10k hours, 5M ut-
terances, and 80k speakers per language (English and Korean),
utilizing a mix of human-annotated and ASR-generated tran-
scriptions.
4.2. Model and Baselines
We apply RobustSpeechFlow to SupertonicTTS [3], a compact
flow-matching model operating onSupertonic autoencoderla-
tents. Keeping the architecture fixed, we compare three objec-
tives: (i)Baseline(vanilla SupertonicTTS), (ii)ContrastiveFM
(baseline with random-batch negatives), and (iii)RobustSpeech-
Flow(ContrastiveFM with augmentation-based hard negatives).
To isolate the objective’s effect, we train an utterance-level du-
ration predictor independently and share the exact same pre-
Table 1:Performance on the Seed-TTS-eval benchmark. Lower
WER and higher SIM are better. The lower block reports our
compact in-family baselines and RobustSpeechFlow.
Model Params WER↓SIM↑
MegaTTS3 [23] 0.5B 2.79 0.77
Seed-TTSDiT [21] – 1.730.79
DiTAR [5] 0.6B 1.69 0.74
MiniMax-Speech [24] – 1.65 0.69
F5-TTS [2] 0.3B 2.00 0.67
CosyV oice3 [25] 1.5B 2.22 0.72
Spark-TTS [26] 0.5B 3.14 0.57
OpenAudio S1-Mini [27] 0.5B 1.94 0.55
IndexTTS2 [28] 1.5B 2.23 0.71
VibeV oice [7] 1.5B 3.04 0.69
V oxCPM-Emilia [6] 0.5B 2.34 0.68
V oxCPM [6] 0.5B 1.85 0.73
Baseline(SupertonicTTS)0.06B1.44 0.60
ContrastiveFM0.06B1.41 0.60
RobustSpeechFlow 0.06B 1.380.60
trained text-to-latent checkpoint across all methods. Follow-
ing SupertonicTTS, we input raw text without grapheme-to-
phoneme conversion.
4.3. Training and Inference Settings
Audio is resampled to 44.1 kHz for both training and inference.
We train all models for 500k steps on 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs
using dynamic batching. We use the AdamW optimizer (learn-
ing rate 5e-4,β= (0.9,0.999), zero weight decay), halving
the learning rate every 200k steps. Reference speech is sampled
from a same-speaker segment uniformly drawn from 3 to 10
seconds. For all methods, we apply Length-Aware RoPE [17]
and context-sharing batch expansion (factor 6) [3]. While Ro-
bustSpeechFlow usesλ rand =λ aug = 0.2, ContrastiveFM sets
λaug = 0.0. For deployment-oriented inference, we use an Eu-
ler solver with a classifier-free guidance weight of 3.0 at NFE
∈{12,24}.
4.4. Evaluation Metrics
We evaluate on two suites: the public Seed-TTS-eval bench-
mark [21] and our newly constructed ZERO500 benchmark.
ZERO500 is designed to stress alignment under diverse condi-
tions, containing 50 diverse reference voices (e.g., game, news,
conversational) per language (English and Korean). Each voice
is randomly paired with 10 text prompts, yielding 500 pairs per
language. We synthesize each pair twice using different random
seeds and report the average.
We transcribe the synthesized audio using Whisper large-
v3 [22] to compute the character error rate (CER, %) and word
error rate (WER, %). Scoring applies only light text normal-
ization, limited to punctuation removal and simple whitespace
cleanup.
5. Results
5.1. Zero-shot Intelligibility on Seed-TTS-eval
We first evaluate on the public Seed-TTS-eval benchmark [21].
Table 1 summarizes the benchmark comparison against repre-
sentative zero-shot TTS systems together with our in-family
baselines. Within the compact SupertonicTTS setup, standard
ContrastiveFM already reduces the WER from 1.44 to 1.41, and
6918
Table 2:Results on ZERO500 at 500k steps (%). Lower is better.
Model NFE English Korean
CER↓WER↓CER↓WER↓
Baseline 12 0.55 1.25 0.93 8.46
Baseline 24 0.48 1.18 0.81 8.40
ContrastiveFM 12 0.41 1.10 0.77 7.92
ContrastiveFM 24 0.39 1.06 0.65 7.72
RobustSpeechFlow12 0.43 1.140.577.59
RobustSpeechFlow240.35 1.03 0.57 7.45
RobustSpeechFlow further improves it to 1.38 while keeping
the same similarity score (SIM) of 0.60. This corresponds to a
relative WER reduction of 4.2% over the vanilla baseline and
2.1% over standard ContrastiveFM. Remarkably, this achieves
the lowest WER across the entire benchmark despite utilizing
only 0.06B parameters. These results show that alignment-
focused contrastive training can materially improve intelligibil-
ity even in a compact model regime. Notably, many competing
systems are 5 to over 20 times larger, yet do not match this
WER. SIM remains unchanged across the three compact vari-
ants, suggesting that the WER gain is strictly attributable to im-
proved alignment rather than a shift in speaker conditioning.
5.2. Alignment Robustness in Diverse Conditions
While Seed-TTS-eval is a standard zero-shot benchmark, its re-
liance on read speech with limited prosodic variation restricts
its ability to reflect diverse real-world usage conditions. To bet-
ter evaluate alignment robustness under such diversity, we con-
structed the ZERO500 benchmark for English and Korean and
evaluated all systems at the 500k training step.
Table 2 demonstrates that RobustSpeechFlow consistently
outperforms the baselines, providing the most reliable align-
ment. Specifically, under the highly constrained NFE=12 set-
ting, the proposed method reduces the Korean CER from 0.93%
to 0.57% and the WER from 8.46% to 7.59% compared to the
vanilla baseline. This strong performance holds at NFE=24,
where CER is further reduced to 0.57% and WER to 7.45%.
On the English subset, RobustSpeechFlow similarly improves
upon the baseline across both NFE settings, ultimately achiev-
ing the best overall result at NFE=24 with a CER of 0.35% and a
WER of 1.03%. Although standard ContrastiveFM shows slight
advantages on English at NFE=12, its gains do not transfer as
consistently across languages and NFE regimes. Overall, these
metrics suggest that augmentation-based hard negatives provide
a fundamentally more robust alignment signal than random ut-
terance mismatches alone.
5.3. Stability Across Training Stages
Figure 1 provides a clearer perspective on how alignment stabil-
ity evolves over the course of training, contextualizing the final
results from Table 2. First, RobustSpeechFlow demonstrates
markedly superior reliability on Korean. Across both NFE set-
tings, its CER steadily drops and stabilizes at 0.57% at 500k,
whereas the baseline plateaus at higher error rates (0.81% at
NFE=24) and ContrastiveFM ends at 0.65%. This highlights
the critical benefit of failure-mode negatives when the target
language and benchmark contain high prosodic variation.
On English, the training dynamics present a more complex
picture. While standard ContrastiveFM is competitive early
on, its trajectory exhibits higher variance. Conversely, Robust-
100k 200k 300k 400k 500k
Training Steps
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70CER (%)
A
B
C
(a) ZERO500-en CER (%), NFE=12
100k 200k 300k 400k 500k
Training Steps
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65CER (%)
A
B
C (b) ZERO500-en CER (%), NFE=24
100k 200k 300k 400k 500k
Training Steps
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2CER (%)
A
B
C
(c) ZERO500-ko CER (%), NFE=12
100k 200k 300k 400k 500k
Training Steps
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0CER (%)
A
B
C (d) ZERO500-ko CER (%), NFE=24
Figure 1:CER (%) over training steps on ZERO500. In
each panel, legend A, B, and C correspond to Baseline, Con-
trastiveFM, and RobustSpeechFlow, respectively.
SpeechFlow establishes a more consistent optimization path as
training progresses, notably overtaking all methods from 300k
onward at NFE=24 to reach the lowest final CER. We hypoth-
esize that explicitly penalizing the model for entering latent re-
gions associated with skip and repeat errors effectively stabi-
lizes the loss landscape for cross-attention alignment during the
later stages of training. Consequently, augmentation-based neg-
atives yield the most consistent gains in high-stress alignment
scenarios, particularly for low-NFE regimes.
6. Discussion and Conclusion
We presented RobustSpeechFlow, a zero-shot TTS train-
ing strategy that improves content fidelity through length-
preserving repeat and skip augmentations in contrastive flow
matching. By simulating these common failure modes within
the latent space, our approach directly aligns the contrastive
penalty with the structured errors observed in real-world de-
ployment. Consequently, without requiring external models or
preference data, it reduces the WER on Seed-TTS-eval from
1.44 (baseline) to 1.38 using only 0.06B parameters. While
standard contrastive flow matching can remain competitive in
certain specific settings, our augmentation strategy demon-
strates broader reliability and delivers the most consistent in-
telligibility improvements on the diverse ZERO500 benchmark,
particularly under low-NFE regimes.
While RobustSpeechFlow excels in alignment robustness, a
trade-off with speaker similarity remains on the public bench-
mark. We hypothesize that this gap stems primarily from
the representational limits of the compact baseline architec-
ture rather than the proposed objective itself, and can be mit-
igated by scaling the speech codec and backbone. Further-
more, while objective ASR-based metrics are valuable for scal-
able benchmarking, they can be inherently biased by recog-
nition errors and arbitrary text normalization choices. Future
work will complement these metrics with comprehensive sub-
jective assessments (e.g., MOS), expand the design of speech-
mimicking negative latents to target a broader taxonomy of
realistic failure modes, and investigate the generalizability of
this approach across larger flow-matching and autoregressive-
diffusion frameworks.
6919
7. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used exclusively for proofreading, im-
proving the grammatical quality of the manuscript, and assisting
in the preparation of the demo webpage. The core text and all
scientific contributions were fully developed and authored by
the human authors.