STArK: Towards Synthesizing Articulatory Kinematics from Text
Xavier Yin ID ∗∗, Carlos Busso ID
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
xoy@cs.cmu.edu, busso@cmu.edu
Abstract
Recent deep learning approaches in modeling articulatory kine-
matics have shown success in mapping speech audio toelec-
tromagnetic articulography(EMA) kinematics, but these meth-
ods are limited by the scarcity of high-quality articulatory
datasets. We introducesynthesizing text to articulatory kine-
matics(STArK), which offers a novel approach in generating ar-
ticulatory kinematics directly from text. We train STArK on the
LibriTTS-R dataset with pseudo-labeled EMA features derived
from a pre-trained speech-to-articulation model. STArK is the
first model to demonstrate high-quality articulatory kinematics
generation from text. STArK achieves comparable performance
to existing multi-speaker text-to-speech models at speech syn-
thesis, while supporting voice cloning without seeing speaker
embeddings during training. STArK aims to enable the gener-
ation of scalable articulatory data from text corpora for down-
stream tasks.
Index Terms: text-to-articulatory synthesis, electromagnetic
articulography, articulatory representation, speech synthesis,
text-to-speech, voice cloning
1. Introduction
Humans produce speech by manipulating the articulators in the
vocal tract. Articulation is the key to understanding human
speech production. It is used as the foundation of the source-
filter model [1], guides the understanding of articulatory pho-
netics [1–3], and has been demonstrated in sensorimotor cortex
studies on speech production [4, 5]. Despite the importance of
articulatory models and data in understanding human speech,
limited research on the usage of articulation-based features in
speech synthesis models has been conducted until recently [6].
Ultimately, articulation is still an underexplored feature space
in speech processing.
Previous studies have demonstrated high-quality speech
synthesis from articulatory features obtained byelectromag-
netic articulography(EMA) recordings [6]. Others have uti-
lized articulatory information to conditiontext-to-speech(TTS)
generation, showing improved speech synthesis quality [7]. Re-
cently, Cho et al. [6] demonstrated the capability to predict ac-
curate EMA trajectories from raw speech audio, significantly
increasing the possible use-cases of articulatory data in the
speech processing domain. Nevertheless, the aforementioned
techniques are fundamentally limited by the lack of available
high-quality articulatory data to use for training.
Although other studies have demonstrated the synthe-
sis of speech from articulatory representations, the synthesis
of articulatory representations directly from text remains an
**indicates the corresponding author.
open research question. Such a capability would greatly ex-
pand the feasibility of articulation-based speech models. Si-
multaneously, this would provide much-needed interpretabil-
ity compared to high-dimensional speech embeddings or mel-
spectrogram-based features. Articulatory synthesis has down-
stream applications in phonetics research, cross-linguistic anal-
ysis, disordered speech enhancement, and speech avatar simu-
lation.
We introducesynthesizing text to articulatory kinemat-
ics(STArK), a novel approach that generates high-fidelity
articulation-based features directly from text. STArK addresses
the capability gap of previous spoken articulatory synthesis
methods, as well as the need for scalable articulatory data gen-
eration. In this work, we demonstrate the following:
1. STArK generates high-quality articulatory kinematics in a
normalized articulation feature space and synthesizes intel-
ligible speech;
2. STArK accurately models the articulatory processes in the
human vocal tract; and
3. STArK does not require speaker embeddings during training
to achieve multi-speaker speech synthesis and voice cloning.
We believe that STArK can be used to significantly broaden
the range of datasets available to researchers using articula-
tory kinematics data, and enable research towards understand-
ing human speech biomechanics, developing assistive technolo-
gies, and creating interpretable speech models. Code for re-
producing STArK and demo samples are available athttps:
//github.com/Lab-MSP/STArK/.
2. Related Work
Using articulation to assist TTS models has been attemped in
previous studies. Ling et al. [8] introduce the idea of using artic-
ulatory features for speech synthesis usinghidden Markov mod-
els(HMMs). Since then, Csap ´o et al. [9] have combineddeep
neural network(DNN) architectures with text and tongue image
prompts to generate speech. More recently, Wang et al. [7] con-
ditioned mel-spectrogram generation on articulatory features to
improve voice timbre and speaking prosody in the multi-speaker
setting. However, these studies generally assume that articula-
tory information is available for conditioning generation rather
than synthesizing articulatory information from input text.
STArK uses the articulatory coding framework introduced
in SPARC [6]. SPARC is designed to invert speech audio to
15 vocal tract parameters (12 EMA features, pitch, periodic-
ity, and loudness) that represent the biomechanical implemen-
tation of phonetic contents. SPARC then resynthesizes these
articulatory features back to the corresponding audio wave-
form. SPARC predicts 6 x–y coordinate pairs for its EMA fea-
tures: Upper Lip (ULX/ULY), Lower Lip (LLX/LLY), Lower
6542
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-2842
(b) Temporal Regulator
Phoneme 
Encoder
Articulatory 
Decoder
SPARC 
Encoder
Speaker Embedding
Unsupervised 
Aligner
Duration 
Predictor
Duration 
Expansion
Ground Truth 
Speech
G2P
Input Text
Hello, World!
Phonemes
h ə l oʊ <sp> | 
w ɜːr l d <exclm>
ℒalign
ℒdur
ℒart
Latent Phoneme 
Representations
Generated 
Speech
(a) Text Encoder
(c)
SPARC 
Vocoder
(e)
(d)
Predicted Features
SPARC Features
Figure 1:STArK model diagram showing the pipeline from text graphemes to articulatory kinematics and speech output. Red dotted
arrows represent operations performed during training only. Black dotted arrow represents operations performed during inference
only. During training, Duration Expansion uses the output of the Unsupervised Alignment Module rather than the Duration Predictor.
Incisor (LIX/LIY), Tongue Tip (TTX/TTY), Tongue Blade
(TBX/TBY), and Tongue Dorsum (TDX/TDY). SPARC utilizes
a template articulatory space, disentangled from the voice tim-
bre, which is separately modeled by a speaker encoder. Cho
et al. [6] demonstrated that EMA feature spaces between dif-
ferent speakers are separated by an affine transform, allowing
for generalizable multispeaker articulatory synthesis. Given
that SPARC is grounded in vocal tract physiology, disentangled
from speaker identity, and low-dimensional, SPARC features
are an effective representation for modeling human speech from
text.
3. Model Architecture
STArK follows anon-autoregressive(NAR)text-to-articulation
(TTA) pipeline that is inspired by similar NAR TTS models
such as FastSpeech 2 [10] or FastPitch [11]. These models gen-
erate mel-spectrograms, whereas STArK uses this architecture
to predict articulatory features: 12 EMA features, loudness, and
pitch. Note that we do not predict SPARC’s periodicity feature,
as this is not used by the SPARC vocoder, but only used by
SPARC’s speaker encoder [6].
Fig. 1 shows the STArK architecture. Following Deligh-
fulTTS [12] and FastSpeech 2 Conformer [13], we opted for
feed-forward Conformer(FFConformer) blocks [14] in the Text
Encoder (Fig. 1(a)) and for the Articulatory Decoder (Fig. 1(c)),
as it has shown slight performance gains over Transformer-
based variants on the TTS task [13]. Between the Encoder and
the Decoder, we retain the Temporal Regulator module as de-
scribed in previous NAR TTS studies [10–12, 15, 16].
3.1. Text Encoder
The Text Encoder (Fig. 1(a)) consists of two components: (1)
an off-the-shelfgrapheme-to-phoneme(G2P) module and (2)
an FFConformer Phoneme Encoder module.
The G2P module uses Phonemizer 1 implemented with
the eSpeak NG 2 backend with the US English model. The
phonemes are first converted to phoneme IDs, and then into vec-
tor embeddings. These embeddings are fed into the position-
wise FFConformer that usesrotary positional embeddings
(RoPE) [17] to encode positional information. RoPE has shown
improved performance over other positional embedding tech-
niques such asrelative positional embeddings(RPE) [18].
1https://github.com/bootphon/phonemizer
2https://github.com/espeak-ng/espeak-ng
STArK retains the reversed order of the depth-wise convo-
lution and multi-head self-attention layers as introduced by Liu
et al. [12]. Inspired by Luo et al. [16], the convolutional lay-
ers are replaced withseparable convolution(SepConv) layers.
The final outputs of the Phoneme Encoder are the FFConformer
phoneme representations for each phoneme input, as shown in
Fig. 1.
3.2. Feature Extraction and Speech Synthesis
We use the SPARC [6] (en+) model to extract articulatory fea-
ture targets for each training speech sample: 12 EMA features,
pitch, and loudness. We freeze the SPARC encoder and use
it to generate speaker embeddings for voice cloning purposes
(Fig. 1(d)). Similarly, we freeze and use the SPARC vocoder
(Fig. 1(e)), which is a HiFi-GAN [19] modified to use articu-
latory features and a SPARC speaker embedding as input, to
synthesize speech from the predicted articulatory kinematics.
To improve training convergence and increase the speaker
independence of the predicted articulatory features generated by
STArK, the SPARC pitch value is logarithmically normalized
by the median pitch of the utterance (Eq. 1). The predicted pitch
that is output by STArK is then denormalized according to the
median pitch of the target speaker, facilitating voice cloning.
ˆf0[i] = logf 0[i]
log (median{f 0[k]|k∈[0,T]}) (1)
3.3. Temporal Regulator
An important concept in many NAR TTS systems is temporal
regulation. The Temporal Regulator (Fig. 1(b)) in STArK oper-
ates in two stages: (1) generate durations for each phoneme rep-
resentation from the Phoneme Encoder, and (2) replicate each
of the phoneme representations by their associated duration.
Stage (1) involves an Unsupervised Aligner and a Dura-
tion Predictor (Fig. 1(b)). Previous studies have used exter-
nal aligners such as the Montreal Forced Aligner [20]. In the
Unsupervised Aligner, STArK employs the One TTS Align-
ment method [21] to extract and learn ground-truth phoneme
durations without external alignment dependencies during the
training process. We adapt this approach to use pre-processed
extracted SPARC features rather than mel-spectrogram frames.
Furthermore, we use the Phoneme Encoder output rather than
the phoneme embeddings so that the Unsupervised Aligner and
Duration Predictor receive the same phoneme representations
as input.
6543
Following the monotonic alignment search algorithm [22],
the “soft” probabilistic alignment map output by the Unsuper-
vised Aligner is converted into “hard” alignment by using the
Viterbi algorithm [23], extracting the most probable monotonic
alignment path between phonemes and SPARC frames. This
hard alignment is then used to extract ground-truth phoneme
durations.
The Duration Predictor follows FastSpeech-based mod-
els [10–12, 15, 16] with three stacked SepConv layers, substi-
tuting the convolutional layers with SepConv. It receives the
Phoneme Encoder’s output and outputs a single duration value
that represents the number of audio frames each phoneme is
pronounced for. For numerical stability, logarithmic durations
are predicted and then exponentiated to get the predicted dura-
tions.
Stage (2), “Duration Expansion,” involves taking the pre-
dicted durations and repeating the Phoneme Encoder represen-
tations for each phoneme the corresponding number of times.
During training, we utilize the Unsupervised Aligner durations
for this process, whereas during inference, we use the Duration
Predictor’s output.
3.4. Articulation Decoder and Loss Function
The Articulation Decoder (Fig. 1(c)) follows the same FFCon-
former architecture as the Phoneme Encoder. It receives the
duration-regulated representations from the Temporal Regula-
tor and predicts a position-wise articulatory feature representa-
tion for each. These predicted articulatory features are then fed
into the frozen SPARC vocoder to synthesize speech.
During training, the overall loss is calculated as follows.
We used themean squared error(MSE) between the 14 gener-
ated articulatory features and the extracted (pitch-normalized)
SPARC features to compute the articulation loss (Lart). We use
the alignment loss (L align) for NAR TTS models as described
in One TTS Alignment [21], and the MSE loss between the Du-
ration Predictor’s log-durations and the Unsupervised Aligner’s
log-durations (Ldur). Therefore, the overall loss function to op-
timize can be represented as:
L=L art +αL align +βL dur,(2)
whereαandβrepresent loss weights that are chosen hyperpa-
rameters.
4. Experimental Methodology
4.1. Dataset and Preprocessing
To demonstrate the performance of the STArK architecture,
we train and run inference on LibriTTS-R [24], a commonly
used multi-speaker English-language TTS dataset. We used
the original train-clean-100, dev-clean,test-cleansplits of
LibriTTS-R. We used SPARC to extract articulatory features
for all audio samples, as well as per-utterance median pitch and
speaker embeddings.
4.2. Training Details
STArK was trained on a single node with 4 L40S GPUs with
48GB of memory each. The base model has 73.7M parameters
and was trained for 32,000 steps which took approximately 96
hours. We used the AdamW [25] optimizer with an initial learn-
ing rate of 2×10 −4 and a cosine-decay scheduler with 10,000
warm-up steps.
4.3. Evaluation Metrics
For articulatory metrics, we compare our results against SPARC
(en+). We reconstruct articulatory feature sequences from text
using STArK with the following setups: Setup (1) predicted
durations, Setup (2) providing aligner-generated durations, and
Setup (3) providing aligner-generated durations along with orig-
inal pitch and loudness features from SPARC. The aim of using
Setups (2) and (3) is to evaluate text-to-articulation performance
without bias towards prosodic accuracy.
For speech metrics, we compare our synthesized speech
against YourTTS [26], which has zero-shot voice cloning ca-
pability to demonstrate that STArK inherently has similar capa-
bility by using the SPARC vocoder. For all subsequent speech
metrics, the audio is resampled to 16 kHz.
For speech quality, we use automaticmean opinion score
(MOS) metrics (UTMOSv2 [27] and DNSMOS [28, 29]),
and for intelligibility we use theword error rate(WER)
between the ground truth transcriptions and Whisper [30]
(whisper-large-v3-turbo) transcriptions. We report
MOS values for each evaluated model as a mean value with
a 95% confidence interval over the LibriTTS-Rtest-clean
subset. We calculate WER as a single value over the LibriTTS-
Rtest-cleansubset.
In addition, we report thenaturalnessMOS (NMOS) col-
lected from evaluations completed by a total of 10 participants
proficient in English. Nopersonal identifiable information(PII)
was collected. Participants were asked to rate each audio sam-
ple independently on a scale of 1-5, with 1 being the least nat-
ural and 5 the most natural. We report NMOS as a mean value
with 95% confidence interval for each model over 24 randomly
selected samples from the LibriTTS-Rtest-cleansubset.
The samples were shown to the participants in a random order
with no two utterances having the same lexical content. Due to
the small sample size of 40 ratings for each of the six evaluated
models, the 95% confidence interval is calculated using a boot-
strap distribution over 10,000 samples of the 10 participants.
We also measure speaker similarity to ground truth audio
in order to quantify speaker similarity degradation as a result of
multi-speaker generalization. We use Pyannote’s [31, 32] em-
bedding model 3 to extract speaker embeddings. Then, we re-
port thespeaker embedding cosine similarity(SECS) between
the ground truth audio synthesized audio with a 95% confidence
interval over the entire LibriTTS-Rtest-cleansubset.
Although Cho et al. [6] used thePearson correlation coef-
ficient(PCC) to evaluate articulatory trace similarity, we only
report this metric for Setup (2). This is because in Setup (1), the
durations of SPARC and STArK sequences will not be identi-
cal. We also reportdynamic time warping(DTW) [33] scores
between the extracted SPARC features and the synthesized ar-
ticulatory features from STArK. This metric indicates how sim-
ilar, in terms of articulation, the two sequences are over each
utterance. We report thedifference in DTW scores(∆DTW)
between Setup (1) and Setup (2), where a negative∆DTW in-
dicates an improvement in DTW by adding aligner durations.
Following Cho et al. [6], we report the EMA, pitch, and loud-
ness metrics separately.
5. Results
Table 1 shows speech synthesis evaluation results. DNSMOS
gives four values: DNSMOS P.808,signal quality(SIG),back-
ground noise(BAK), andoverall(OVR), with the last three
forming the DNSMOS P.835 audio evaluation metric. We see
that baseline STArK performs similarly to theground-truth
(GT) audio from LibriTTS-R on DNSMOS. Providing align-
ment information (Setup (2)) or both alignment and prosody
3https://huggingface.co/pyannote/embedding
6544
Table 1:Speech synthesis evaluation results. The best model result for each metric isboldedand second best is underlined . Multiple
boldedand underlined values indicate results that are not statistically different,p≥0.05.
Model DNSMOS UTMOS↑NMOS↑SECS↑WER↓
P.808↑SIG↑BAK↑OVR↑ v2
GT 3.71±0.01 3.465±0.007 3.925±0.008 3.135±0.009 3.25±0.01 3.9±0.4 1.000 2.39
SPARC 3.77±0.01 3.543±0.005 4.024±0.006 3.240±0.007 3.03±0.01 3.7±0.3 0.493±0.006 3.31
STArK 3.71±0.01 3.504±0.006 3.902±0.009 3.142±0.009 2.97±0.01 2.8±0.6 0.426±0.005 6.25
+ aligner 3.84±0.013.540±0.005 3.983±0.007 3.216±0.008 2.85±0.01 2.9±0.4 0.446±0.005 6.30
+ prosody 3.79±0.01 3.537±0.005 4.006±0.006 3.224±0.007 3.03±0.013.3±0.3 0.478±0.006 6.01
YourTTS 3.81±0.01 3.568±0.005 4.100±0.004 3.307±0.006 2.80±0.01 2.0±0.5 0.410±0.005 4.58
Figure 2:Example comparison between generated articulatory
features using STArK (green solid), STArK with aligner dura-
tions (orange dashed), and extracted SPARC features from the
SPARC model (purple dotted). Y-axis labels are x–y positions
for Upper Lip, Lower Lip, Lower Incisor, Tongue Tip, Tongue
Blade, and Tongue Dorsum, in addition to Pitch and Loudness.
information (Setup (3)) allows STArK to match SPARC in
performance over P.835 metrics and exceed SPARC in P.808
MOS score. In the UTMOSv2 metric, STArK outperforms
YourTTS and achieves similar results to SPARC when ground
truth prosody is provided. The NMOS results are largely in
agreement with the UTMOSv2 results, placing STArK between
SPARC and YourTTS, with Setup (3) performing the best of the
STArK setups.
We also observe that despite training on significantly less
data and not having access to speaker embeddings during train-
ing, STArK performs admirably against multilingual YourTTS
on DNSMOS metrics and outperforms YourTTS on SECS.
We attribute this advantage in voice cloning capability to the
strong speaker–content disentanglement provided by SPARC.
YourTTS outperforms STArK with respect to WER, but the
drop in performance from SPARC to STArK is expected.
Adding ground truth prosody improves WER, indicating that
future work should focus on improving prosody generation.
Fig. 2 shows an example of an articulatory trajectory for a
single utterance generated by STArK Setup (1) (green), STArK
Table 2:Articulatory feature similarity results for EMA, pitch,
and loudness between STArK and SPARC. Pearson correlation
coefficient (PCC) is calculated based on STArK with aligner
durations and∆DTW is the difference in dynamic time warp-
ing (DTW) distance between STArK with and without aligner
durations.
STArK PCC↑∆DTW↓
EMA 0.905±0.001−0.81±0.09
Pitch 0.533±0.009−0.04±0.04
Loudness 0.796±0.002−0.20±0.06
Setup (2) with aligner durations (orange), and SPARC inver-
sion (purple). In this figure, base STArK does not use aligner
durations and thus predicts phoneme durations without exter-
nal conditioning. This results in a temporal warping of the
trajectories that can be observed in the figure. After adding
aligner durations the EMA features and the loudness feature
appear to closely follow the SPARC-predicted trajectories, with
only the pitch feature having noticeable deviation from the ex-
tracted SPARC trajectory. This observation is further supported
in Table 2, with Setup (2) showing improved DTW metrics
over Setup (1) for both EMA and loudness, but not for pitch.
The lower PCC performance for pitch, as well as the lack of
improvement in DTW after adding aligner durations, is ex-
pected as there is no prosody conditioning in the model. Im-
portantly, these results demonstrate that we can inject durations
into STArK for finer-grained control over output without loss of
speech quality, which would be a useful functionality for tasks
such as disfluent speech enhancement or reconstruction.
6. Conclusions
In this work, we introduced STArK, a text-to-articulatory syn-
thesis model that aims to help bridge the articulatory data
gap for the training of articulation-grounded speech models.
STArK demonstrates strong articulatory trajectory prediction,
high speech synthesis quality, and innate voice cloning capa-
bilities. For future work, we believe that improving the time-
domain features such as prosody, emotion, and accent will
prove vital towards demonstrating the usability of articulatory
representations in speech synthesis. We also plan to stream-
line the training process and enhance the model architecture to
use more recent techniques such as flow matching to generate
higher fidelity articulatory representations. Future work will
also improve human and automated evaluation robustness and
explore using STArK for downstream speech processing tasks,
such as speech disorder assessment.
6545
7. Acknowledgments
The authors thank Cheol Jun Cho and Prof. Gopala Anu-
manchipalli for their assistance in the usage of the SPARC
model. Early stage experiments for STArK were conducted by
the primary author, Xavier Yin, during his M.S. degree at the
University of California, Berkeley under Prof. Gopala Anu-
manchipalli.
8. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI use was limited to editing and polishing the
manuscript’s content. Generative AI tools were not used to
write drafts, analyze results, create citations, or otherwise in
the writing process of this manuscript.
9. References
[1] G. Fant,Acoustic Theory of Speech Production. Berlin,
Boston: De Gruyter Mouton, 1971. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110873429
[2] C. P. Browman and L. M. Goldstein, “Articulatory Phonology:
An Overview,”Phonetica, vol. 49, pp. 155 – 180, 1992. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1159/000261913
[3] International Phonetic Association,Handbook of the Interna-
tional Phonetic Association: A Guide to the Use of the Interna-
tional Phonetic Alphabet. Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1017/9780511807954
[4] J. Chartier, G. K. Anumanchipalli, K. Johnson, and E. F.
Chang, “Encoding of Articulatory Kinematic Trajectories
in Human Speech Sensorimotor Cortex,”Neuron, vol. 98,
no. 5, pp. 1042–1054.e4, 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.04.031
[5] G. K. Anumanchipalli, J. Chartier, and E. F. Chang, “Speech
synthesis from neural decoding of spoken sentences,”Nature,
vol. 568, no. 7753, pp. 493–498, Apr. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https