How do word frequency and syllable surprisal affect response time and acoustic 
duration in sentence formulation? 
Ivan Yuen, Bernd Möbius, Bistra Andreeva, Mitko Sabev 
 Language Science and Technology Saarland University, Germany 
{ivyuen, moebius, andreeva, msabev}@lst.uni-saarland.de 
 
Abstract 
Although predictability effects have been shown to affect 
acoustic realization (e.g., [1  - 8]) at different linguistic levels, 
they are mostly based on variation of predictability at a specific 
linguistic level. Yet linguistic levels are embedded within one 
another. ‘Frequency of occurrence’ is one type of predictability, 
which could occur at the level of word (word frequency) and 
syllable (syllable frequency). The current study explored such 
cross-level interaction on response time and acoustic vowel 
duration in German , in the context of the psycholinguistic 
model of speech production in [14]. We hypothesized an 
additive effect; however, our findings revealed selective 
interaction, depending on whether the word is mono - or di -
syllabic. These results challenge the assumption of ‘discrete, 
staged and serial’ processing across levels in [14]. 
Index Te rms: speech production, word frequency , syllable 
surprisal, response time, acoustic vowel duration 
1. Introduction 
Linguistic predictability is pervasive  and one type of 
predictability is related to exposure and usage: occurrence 
frequency. The ‘frequency’ effect has been reported to occur at 
multiple linguistic levels, such as word and syllable. It has been 
shown to affect speech initiation response time (RT) and 
various acoustic measures with fast RT, short duration  and 
reduced spectral characteristics  for frequent unit s [1 - 13]. 
However, those studies tend to focus on either RT or acoustic  
measures at one specific linguistic level. It is not clear how 
‘frequency’ might play out across multiple linguistic levels, for 
example, word and syllable , and whether RT and acoustic 
measures characterize the same kind of process in speech 
production planning.  
At the lexical level, high frequency (HF) words are easy to 
access, and therefore  fast retrieval leads to short  RT [11]. 
Similarly, HF words are reported to exhibit short acoustic 
duration [3 - 5, 7, 13 ]. From an information -theoretic 
perspective, speakers economize their effort in producing HF 
words which are predictable from usage, without compromising 
lexical access.  
Likewise, frequency at the syllable level is found to have 
fast access leading to short RT [9 – 10, 12] and exhibit short 
acoustic duration [8]. According to the psycholinguistic model 
of speech production [14], the syllable frequency effect on RT 
has been argued to be a post -lexical process, arising from  the 
retrieval in the mental syllabary [9, 12, 14]. Short RT arises, 
because the high frequency syllable is  stored and precompiled 
with articulatory specification from the phonological code (i.e. 
syllabification). Precompilation can save the time needed to 
compute online the articulatory specification , implying a tight 
relationship between RT and phonetic encoding. Consequently, 
the effect of syllable frequency on acoustic duration emerges 
from the retrieval of a stored and precompiled high frequency 
syllable. However, the previous studies mostly manipulated 
syllable frequency in pseudo-words with some exceptions such 
as [ 12] in which word frequency covaries with syllable 
frequency. 
But r eal words can have  high or low frequency, each of 
which can vary in syllable frequency as well. This then raises 
the question of how word frequency and syllable frequency 
could affect RT and acoustic duration, which the current study 
intends to explore. The current study indexed syllable 
frequency in terms of ‘surprisal’. A high syllable surprisal 
suggests low syllable frequency and low predictability, whereas 
a low syllable surprisal suggests high frequency and high 
predictability; see section 2.1 for a formal definition of 
surprisal. 
According to the model in [14], different processing stages 
are assumed to be discrete, staged and serial. That is, the word 
frequency effect  (i.e., any advantage in RT from the high 
frequency word) at the lexical level  will be percolated 
downstream to lower levels for  phonological and phonetic 
encoding. In light of that , we  hypothesize short RT for high 
frequency words and long RT for low frequency words, with an 
additive effect of syllable  surprisal (short RT for low surprisal 
syllables and long RT for high surprisal syllables). We also 
hypothesize short acoustic duration for low surprisal syllables 
because of the precompiled phonetic form. Given the ‘discrete 
and serial’ processing assumption of the model in [1 4], we 
expect the two hypotheses to hold for both monosyllabic and 
disyllabic words. The predictions are schematized in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1: Predicted effects of word frequency and 
syllable surprisal on predicted response time (RT) and 
acoustic duration.  
Table 1: High frequency and low frequency 
monosyllabic and disyllabic word stimuli, with log 
syllable surprisal values on the stressed syllable.  
Syllable 
type 
High freq. 
word/Syl. 
surprisal 
Low freq. 
word/Syl. 
surprisal 
Stressed 
Vowel 
Monosyl. Kind 
(child)/17 
Gift 
(poison)/17 
/ɪ/ 
 Mensch 
(human)/12 
Mett 
(mince)/17 
/ɛ/ 
 Zahl 
(number)/1
3 
Tal 
(valley)/13 
/a:/ 
 Tag 
(day)/25 
Zahn 
(tooth)/15 
/a:/ 
7112
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1080
Disyl. Katze 
(cat)/13 
Tatze 
(paw)/13 
/a/ 
 Zimmer 
(room)/14 
Gitter 
(grid)/13 
/ɪ/ 
 Fehler 
(error)/13 
Feder 
(feather)/13 
/e:/ 
 Meter 
(meter)/10 
Feta 
(feta)/13 
/e:/ 
 Vater 
(father)/10 
Faser 
(fibre)/10 
/a:/ 
2. Method  
2.1. Stimuli and participants 
The stimuli consisted of monosyllabic and disyllabic German 
words, in which occurrence frequency of words and syllables 
were varied.  While a  syllable is the same as a word in the 
former, a syllable forms part of a word in the latter. By 
including both monosyllabic and disyllabic words, we aimed to 
separate any effect of word frequency from that of syllable 
surprisal. The choice of stimuli was subject to multiple 
constraints. The final stimuli were chosen to be as different as 
possible in word frequency with a range of syllable surprisal, 
while keeping the syllable structure, consonantal voicing and 
vowel identity as similar as possible.  An additional constraint 
was that these words can be depicted in a picture. The selected 
stimuli (Table 1) were also varied to occur in two utterance 
positions: medial , e.g., Das rechte Gift ist grün (gloss: The 
right-side poison is green) vs. final , e.g., Der Mann trinkt das 
Gift (gloss: The man drinks the poison) , to examine further 
whether the frequency effects at both word and syllable levels 
can be generalized across utterance positions. The two utterance 
positions were elicited by two auditory prompt quest ions 
respectively: Welches Gift ist grün? (Which poison is green) for 
the former; Was trinkt der Mann?  (What does the man drink) 
for the latter. The stressed vowel of the stimuli was matched as 
closely as possible in different word frequency/syllable 
surprisal manipulations , restricted broadly to a small set of 
‘tense/long’ and ‘lax/short’ vowels. 
Word frequency was estimated using SUBTLEX -DE [15] 
and CELEX [16], whichever  has a higher count . Binning of 
high (HF) vs. low  (LF) word fr equency was based on a 
threshold of 1000/million. High frequency words ranged from 
1100 to 16542/million, and low  frequency words from 0 to 
630/million. The word frequency measure was consistent with 
word-based unigram surprisal.  
Syllable-based unigram surprisal, defined as -log2 Probability 
(X), was estimated from the best-performing language model 
trained on the deWaC ( .de domain Web as Corpus ) [17]. The 
corpus is a collection of web-crawled data containing about 1.7 
billion word tokens and 8 million word types from diverse 
genres. The corpus was first pre -processed and normalized by 
removing unnecessary/irrelevant/duplicate document 
information, using German Festival TTS [18].  The normalized 
corpus was then split into a training set (80%) and a test set 
(20%). Language models were trained using the SRILM toolkit 
[19] and underwent Witten -Bell smoothing [20]. The test set 
was used to identify the best-performing language model.  
Syllable surprisal ranged from 10 to 25 for the high 
frequency words and from 10 to 17 for the low  frequency 
words. The average syllable surprisal was  higher in the high 
frequency (1 7) than the low frequency (16) monosyllabic 
words. The direction was reversed in the disyllabic words: the 
average syllable surprisal value was lower in the high frequency 
(12) than low  frequency (1 6) words. Note that the syllable 
surprisal estimates were applied to the f irst stressed syllable in 
 
1 https://www.labvanced.com/ 
the disyllabic words after the application of the onset 
maximization principle. Figure 2 shows the relationship 
between word frequency and syllable surprisal of the stimuli. 
 
Figure 2: Relationship of standardized word frequency 
and syllable surprisal values of the monosyllabic and 
disyllabic stimuli.  
Twenty participants took part (9M, 11F, mean age = 23.4 
years, range = 19 -42 years) and were remunerated for their 
participation, with informed consent in accordance with the 
approved ethics guideline at Saarland University.  
2.2. Procedures 
The production experiment consisted of two parts: a picture -
naming task followed by a verbal sentence response generation 
task (i.e. test phase). Prior to testing, two practice items were 
used to familiarize participants with the task. In the picture -
naming task, participants were instructed to name a pictured 
object, with the goal of ensuring that the intended targ et word 
associated with the corresponding object would be used in the 
verbal sentence response generation task in the test phase. 
Testing only began when the y succeeded in associating the 
intended target word with the corresponding picture  in the 
naming ta sk. In the test phase, they were presented with the 
picture of a target word to generate a verbal sentence response 
to an auditory question as soon as possible. The test phase 
contained two blocks, one for the utterance-medial stimuli, and 
another for the utterance-final stimuli. Each trial began with a 
fixation cross (1  second), followed by a visual display (3  
seconds) for previewing. After previewing, participants clicked 
a button to hear one of the auditory prompt questions and were 
instructed to respond as fast as possible. The two blocks were 
repeated. The experiment was created on Labvanced 1 for the 
presentation of visual stimuli, auditory prompt questions, as 
well as randomization. The prompt questions and their sentence 
responses were recorded to a desktop computer using Audacity2 
at a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz. 
2.3. Annotation 
The target word and stressed vowel of the word were annotated 
in Praat [ 21], with reference to waveform and spectrographic 
information. Word level annotation was guided by specific 
acoustic landmarks associated with different consonant types in 
syllable onset or coda position. The onset of burst release was 
used to identify the beginning of words with an onset plosive 
consonant. The onset of frication was used to identify those 
with an onset fricative consonant. The onset of voicing and 
nasal formants were used to identify those with an onset nasal 
consonant. The offset of a disyllabic word was identified as the 
2 https://www.audacityteam.org/ 
7113
end of F2, because it always  ends with an unstressed vowel. 
Since a monosyllabic word ends with a coda consonant, its 
word boundary was identified according to consonant types. 
For coda plosive consonants, the end of release/aspiration was 
used. For coda fricatives, the end of frication was used. For coda 
nasals, the end of nasal formants was used. For laterals, the end 
of F2 was used.  
At the vowel level, the beginning of target vowels was 
identified in terms of clear sharp F1 and F2 onset, and the end 
of target vowels in terms of cl ear F2 offset. The annotated 
vowel boundaries took into consideration additional acoustic 
landmarks from the immediately adjacent consonant in the 
onset and coda positions, for example, frication noise for onset 
fricatives, the closure, release/aspiration for plosives, nasal 
formants for nasals, the closure/release phases for affricates, or 
the sharp turning point in F2 transition/lateral release for 
laterals. Additional acoustic cues were used to identify laterals, 
such as a change in the amplitude of a wa veform arising from 
the secondary resonance chamber.  
Speech initiation response time (RT) was measured from 
the onset of the prompt questions to the onset of the sentence 
response. Vowel duration was automatically extracted from the 
annotation in Praat. 
2.4. Analysis 
Prior to statistical analysis of 1335 items using a linear mixed 
effects model and lmerTest in R [22 - 24], speech initiation 
response time (RT) and vowel duration of the stressed syllable 
were log10 -transformed to adjust for skewness. Syllable 
surprisal was standardized and centered. Linear mixed effects 
models were constructed for RT and vowel duration, testing for 
the effects of WORD FREQUENCY , SYLLABLE SURPRISAL , 
SYLLABLE, and POSITION as fixed predictors, specifically the 
interaction between WORD FREQUENCY  and SYLLABLE 
SURPRISAL. SPEAKER and WORD were included in the random 
structure with intercept and by -factor slope, unless their 
inclusion result ed in overfitting or failure in  model 
convergence. Optimal model fit was then identified using AIC 
and likelihood ratio tests . Significance testing was carried out 
using the anova() function, with Satterthwaite approximation to 
estimate the degree of freedom. 
3. Results 
3.1. Speech initiation response time (RT) 
The structure of the final model using log10RT as a dependent 
variable was: ~  SYLLABLE SURPRISAL * WORD FREQUENCY  * 
SYLLABLE * POSITION + (SYLLABLE + POSITION | SPEAKER) + (1 | 
WORD). The results yielded a significant main effect of syllable 
surprisal (F (1, 16.89) = 9 , p = .006 ), a significant 2-way 
interaction of  syllable surprisal-by-position (F (1, 1265.64) 
=4.9, p < .001), and a 4-way SYLLABLE SURPRISAL-BY WORD 
FREQUENCY-BY-SYLLABLE-BY-POSITION interaction ( F (1, 
1266.1) = 5.1, p =.0 2). To better understand the 4 -way 
interaction, we carried out further sub-analyses of monosyllabic 
and disyllabic words separately.  
3.1.1. Monosyllabic words 
The optimal model for the monosyllabic words had the structure 
of ~ SYLLABLE SURPRISAL + WORD FREQUENCY + POSITION + 
(POSITION + SYLLABLE SURPRISAL | SPEAKER) + (1 | WORD). As 
the full model with interactions reached singularity, a reduced 
model with syllable surprisal/word frequency -by-position 
interactions was used to compare to the optimal model. Based 
on the likelihood ratio test, the additional interactions did not 
result in any improvement of the model fit : ꭓ2 (2) = 1. 68, p = 
.43. The final model yielded significant main effects of WORD 
FREQUENCY (F (1, 7.55) = 7.55, p = .026), and POSITION (F (1, 
20.43) = 4.82, p = .04) (Figure 3). Overall, low frequency (LF) 
words are responded to faster than high frequency (HF) words, 
while it takes longer to respond in medial than final utterance 
position. 
 
 
Figure 3: RT (log) as a function of standardized 
syllable surprisal in high- and low-frequency 
monosyllabic words in medial and final utterance 
positions. 
3.1.2. Disyllabic words 
The optimal model for the disyllabic words had the 
structure of ~ SYLLABLE SURPRISAL + WORD FREQUENCY + 
POSITION + (POSITION | SPEAKER) + (POSITION | WORD). Based on 
the likelihood ratio test, the full model with interactions did not 
improve the model fit: (ꭓ2 (4) = 2.2, p = .7). The optimal model 
yielded a  marginally significant main effect of SYLLABLE 
SURPRISAL (F (1, 9.3) =4.3,  p = .06) (Figure 4), suggesting  that 
speech may be initiated earlier for  a less frequently occurring 
syllable than a more frequently-occurring one. 
 
 
Figure 4: RT (log) as a function of standardized 
syllable surprisal in high- and low-frequency 
disyllabic words. 
In other words, the effects of WORD FREQUENCY  and 
POSITION affect RT to the monosyllabic words; whereas 
SYLLABLE SURPRISAL  influences that to the  disyllabic words. 
We expect ed high frequency words to have short rather than 
long RT, but this was not the case. We also expect ed RT to 
increase as syllable surprisal increases. While this was the case 
for the high frequency monosyllabic words, this was not for the 
low frequency monos yllabic words (Figure 3). As regards the 
disyllabic items, syllable surprisal exhibits a tendency towards 
7114
a weak negative correlation with RT (Figure 4), counter to our 
expectation.  
 
3.2. Long vowel duration 
As syllable surprisal values did not vary in low frequency words 
containing short vowels, this was problematic in fitting a model 
to the data  to examine the interaction between WORD 
FREQUENCY and SYLLABLE SURPRISAL. Therefore, our acoustic 
analysis focused on the data set  containing only long vowels. 
The final model had the structure of ~ SYLLABLE SURPRISAL * 
WORD FREQUENCY * SYLLABLE * POSITION + (SYLLABLE + 
POSITION | SPEAKER) + (1 | WORD). The model yielded four main 
effects: SYLLABLE SURPRISAL  (F (1, 9.15) = 9.02,  p = .01 5), 
SYLLABLE (F (1, 14.32) = 54.83, p < .001), POSITION (F (1, 
37.88) = 124,  p < .001), with two 2-way interactions: SYLLABLE 
SURPRISAL-BY-SYLLABLE (F (1, 9.15) = 33.07, p < .001), and 
SYLLABLE-BY-POSITION (F (1, 684.3) = 5.12, p = .024), as well 
as one 3 -way interaction : SYLLABLE SURPRISAL -BY-WORD 
FREQUENCY-BY-SYLLABLE (F (1, 9.15) = 20.29, p = .00 1). To 
examine the 3 -way interaction, monosyllabic and disyllabic 
items were analyzed separately, like that carried out in  section 
3.1 for comparison and interpretation purposes. 
3.2.1. Monosyllabic words 
The optimal model fit had the structure of ~ WORD FREQUENCY 
+ SYLLABLE SURPRISAL + POSITION + (POSITION | SPEAKER) + (1 | 
WORD), because the model with interactions did not differ from 
that without in terms of the result from the likelihood ratio test. 
The optimal model yielded a significant effect of POSITION (F 
(1, 20.29) = 79.59, p < .001 ), with longer vowel duration in 
final than medial position. No other effects were observed. 
3.2.2. Disyllabic words 
The optimal model fit had the structure of ~ WORD FREQUENCY 
* SYLLABLE SURPRISAL * POSITION + (POSITION + WORD 
FREQUENCY | SPEAKER) + (1 | WORD), based on the likelihood 
ratio test: ꭓ2 (4) = 11.1, p = .026 . The results revealed 
significant main effects of WORD FREQUENCY  (F (1, 5.61) = 
8.49, p = .03 ), SYLLABLE SURPRISAL (F (1, 5.61) = 29.5,  p = 
.002), and POSITION (F (1, 24.02) = 174.7,  p < .001), with one 
2-way interaction: SYLLABLE SURPRISAL-BY-WORD FREQUENCY 
(F (1, 408.17) = 14.8, p = .009). Figure 5 shows the interaction. 
Vowel duration tends to negatively correlate with s yllable 
surprisal, with the effect being stronger in low frequency words, 
counter to our expectation that high syllable surprisal will 
trigger long acoustic vowel duration. 
 
 
Figure 5: Long vowel duration (log) as a function of 
standardized syllable surprisal in high- and low- 
frequency disyllabic words. 
4. Discussion 
Overall, our RT and acoustic long vowel duration findings 
revealed interaction effects, rather than the hypothesized 
additive effect s. As regards RT, the observed pattern is 
conditional on syllable type: monosyllabic or disyllabic words. 
For monosyllabic words, RT patterns follow syllable surprisal , 
perhaps reflecting syllable encoding; however, the direction of 
the syllable surprisal  effect depends on whether the word has 
high frequency or low frequency. When it is a high frequency 
word, high syllable surprisal  slows RT, suggesting that a 
speaker might need more time to resolve the conflict between a 
frequent word and an infrequent syllable. However, when it is 
a low freque ncy word, high syllable surprisal speeds up RT  
because there is no need to reconcile precompiled forms across 
word and syllable levels. For disyllabic words,  high syllable 
surprisal also speeds up RT irrespective of word frequency. Our 
RT findings partially support the notion of  a ‘stored’ syllable, 
but only for the high frequency monosyllabic words  (in line 
with [9, 12]). It remains unclear why the syllable surprisal effect 
is sensitive to the lexical frequency of monosyllabic words, but 
not that of disyllabic words.  Perhaps this is related to the 
relatively restricted range of syllable surprisal  in LF 
monosyllabic words (see Figure 2). This limitation should be 
addressed in future experiments to extend the range of syllable 
surprisal. 
As regards the acoustic long vowel duration measure, the 
effect of syllable surprisal is also conditional on word 
frequency. This interaction is only present for disyllabic words, 
not monosyllabic ones. Surprisingly, the direction of the 
syllable surprisal effect  for low frequency disyllabic words  is 
counter to our expectation, with short er duration for high 
surprisal syllables. Alternatively, the vowel duration pattern can 
be interpreted as the effect of word frequency, conditional on 
syllable surprisal. That is, vowel duration is longer in low 
frequency than high frequency words, when syllable surprisal 
is low. However, the effect of word frequency disappears when 
syllable surprisal is high.  Perhaps high syllable surprisal may 
have overpowered the effect of word frequency; whereas low 
syllable surprisal could not.  In addition, t he lack of a syllable 
surprisal effect for the high  frequency disyllabic words  might 
arise from the interplay of the intrinsic constraint of long 
vowels, polysyllabic shortening, word frequency and syllable 
surprisal. Polysyllabic shortening and high frequency word 
shortening might make it hard for the syllable surprisal effect to 
manifest without the cost of maintaining intrinsic vowel 
duration. 
Although word frequency and syllable surprisal affect RT 
and acoustic duration , the se effects  are manifest in different 
syllable types. The effects of word frequency and syllable 
surprisal on RT appear in monosyllabic and disyllabic words  
respectively; whereas the interaction of word frequency and 
syllable surprisal appear on the acoustic long vowel duration of 
the disyllabic words only. These findings suggest that RT and 
the acoustic measure do not mirror one another and might 
reflect different aspects of the speech production planning 
process. RT might reflect how a unit and what kind of unit s 
need to be  reached prior to speaking ; whereas the acoustic 
measure characterizes  the interplay of structural and usage 
constraints on phonetic specifications of the acoustic output. 
5. Conclusions 
In sum, the current study examined word frequency and syllable 
surprisal on speech initiation response time ( RT) and acoustic 
vowel duration in the context of the psycholinguistic model of 
speech production in [14]. Counter to the hypothesized additive 
effects of word frequency and syllable surprisal, our findings , 
based on 2 different measurement metrics,  generally reveal a 
cross-level interaction effect. These findings cast doubt on the 
assumption of ‘discrete , staged and serial’ processing among 
levels in [1 4], and are rather more  in agreement with 
‘interactive’ types of speech production accounts.  
7115
6. Acknowledgements 
The research was funded by th e Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) 
– Project ID 232722074 – SFB 1102 Information Densi