Larynx segmentation in mid-sagittal speech production real-time MRI
Yubin Zhang1,∗∗, Xuan Shi2, Kevin Huang2, Prakash Kumar2, Kevin Lee2, Louis Goldstein1, Krishna
Nayak2, Shrikanth Narayanan1,2
1 Department of Linguistics, University of Southern California, USA
2 Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern
California, USA
yubinzha@usc.edu
Abstract
The spatiotemporal dynamics and coordination of laryngeal
movements remain incompletely characterized. This study in-
troduces a larynx segmentation and analysis pipeline for mid-
sagittal speech production real-time MRI using Mask2Former,
combining supervised learning with semi-supervised refine-
ment. Our results suggest sufficient segmentation perfor-
mance with∼33–79 annotations per participant (∼25–60% of
794 training samples / 6 participants) using a 5% marginal
gain threshold. Additional annotations beyond this yield di-
minishing returns. Semi-supervised learning achieves modest
improvements but sometimes degrades performance and can-
not reach the fully supervised upper bound. Results from
a sample phonetic study on Mandarin tones demonstrate the
capability of mid-sagittal speech production real-time MRI
to capture spatiotemporal laryngeal dynamics, including both
intrinsic and extrinsic pitch control and laryngeal constric-
tion mechanisms. The proposed pipeline opens new av-
enues for studying laryngeal behaviors in linguistic contrasts
such as voicing, tone, and phonation types using real-time
MRI. Code repository:https://github.com/pkuzyb/
larynx_segmentation.
Index Terms: speech production, MRI segmentation, phonetics
1. Introduction
The larynx plays a central role in regulating voicing, phona-
tion and pitch, which languages employ to distinguish linguis-
tic meanings. Existing phonetic research on the larynx primar-
ily relies on laryngography, laryngoscopy, laryngeal ultrasound
and electromyography [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Laryngography
records vocal fold contact dynamics by measuring electrical
impedance across the glottis, but it provides no direct informa-
tion on the dynamic behaviors of specific glottal and laryngeal
structures [2, 4, 3]. On the other hand, laryngeal ultrasound
can capture some of this information, but it often suffers from
limited image quality and restricted anatomical detail. Most
phonetic studies using laryngeal ultrasound still largely focus
on whole-larynx variables, such as larynx height [9, 1]. Laryn-
goscopy, while providing clearer images, is invasive, requiring
nasal probe insertion by a trained clinician. The speech ma-
terials used in laryngoscopic experiments are often limited, as
some pharyngeal articulations, e.g., back vowels, can obstruct
the laryngoscopic view. Most laryngoscopic research typically
targets qualitative evaluations of glottal states (like phonation
types or voicing) or laryngeal states (like laryngeal tube con-
striction) without quantitatively capturing their temporal dy-
namics [1, 10, 11]. Electromyography provides data on laryn-
**indicates the corresponding author.
geal muscle activity [6, 7, 8], but the dynamics of actual laryn-
geal movements can only be inferred indirectly.
Advancements in real-time MRI provide a non-invasive
modality for imaging various speech production behaviors,
[12, 13, 14], including those of the larynx [15, 16, 17, 18]. How-
ever, most speech MRI research focuses primarily on the supra-
glottal vocal tract or articulators. MRI-based laryngeal pho-
netic research remains in its early stages. Existing MRI work in
the mid-sagittal plane has primarily been limited to measuring
some broad features, like horizontal and vertical larynx move-
ment [16, 18], due to technical challenges for fine-grained la-
ryngeal analysis. Automated articulator segmentation offers a
key method for analyzing speech production dynamics in real-
time MRI [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25], with deep-learning-based
frameworks like U-Net and Mask R-CNN becoming increas-
ingly common [26, 27, 21, 28, 29, 30, 31]. However, only a few
segmentation methods include laryngeal structures [26, 19]. A
more comprehensive automatic larynx segmentation and analy-
sis pipeline for speech research remains to be developed.
Real-time MRI laryngeal imaging and analysis offer new
opportunities to investigate linguistic laryngeal behaviors in
phonetics/phonology and speech production. While many la-
ryngeal actions underlying linguistic and sociolinguistic dis-
tinctions in pitch, voicing, and phonation are broadly identified,
their fine-grained spatiotemporal properties and coordinative re-
lationships have yet to be systematically characterized. For in-
stance, in tone and intonation research, it is well established
that fundamental frequency (f0) reflects the contribution of mul-
tiple motor components, including intrinsic vocal fold tension
adjustments, like cricothyroid-mediated stretching and stiffen-
ing, and extrinsic laryngeal movements such as larynx raising
and lowering [32, 33]. If linguistic tone is modeled as an f0
task of vocal fold vibration [34, 35], one may hypothesize that
it is implemented through coordinated intrinsic and extrinsic la-
ryngeal components at a lower level; yet their spatiotemporal
movement dynamics and synergistic relationships with respect
to the f0 goal are not well investigated. Moreover, such laryn-
geal actions may themselves be hypothesized as spatiotempo-
ral action units of phonological contrasts, analogous to vocal
tract constriction gestures in articulatory phonology. For ex-
ample, [36] hypothesizes that the four level tones of Cantonese
can be represented by two independent articulatory maneuvers:
intrinsic vocal fold tension adjustment (stretching vs. shorten-
ing) and extrinsic larynx height adjustment (raising vs. lower-
ing). Based on the cine-MRI data from a single speaker, the
two upper-register (Ying) tones (55 and 33) are produced with
a higher larynx than the two lower-register (Yang) tones (22
and 21). Within each register, tones seem to be further distin-
guished by intrinsic vocal fold adjustments: 55 and 22 involve
greater stretching than 33 and 21. However, because no de-
554
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1402
tailed quantitative analysis is provided in this preliminary study,
it remains an open question whether these two articulatory ma-
neuvers underlying Cantonese level tones are employed consis-
tently enough to be modeled as spatiotemporal gestures in their
own right. Related evidence comes from Seoul Korean, where
the tense–lax specification of an accentual-phrase–initial conso-
nant conditions high versus low tonal registers across the whole
phrase. The speech real-time MRI study by [37] reports that
this register contrast corresponds closely to differences in lar-
ynx height movement.
The present study introduces a deep-learning pipeline for
larynx segmentation and analysis in mid-sagittal speech real-
time MRI, utilizing the Mask2Former architecture [38]. For the
supervised component, we fine-tune a Mask2Former model pre-
trained on large-scale image datasets with our 0.55T real-time
MRI speech data and expert labels. As in many biomedical
imaging applications, linguistic-phonetic research using real-
time MRI is constrained by the scarcity of expert-labeled data,
which are labor-intensive and time-consuming to produce. Key
questions we investigate are: how many annotations are needed
to achieve satisfactory task performance and at what number do
gains substantially decrease? The U-Net–based model in [27]
uses 392 labeled images, while the Mask R-CNN–based model
in [26] uses 1,127. A recent multi-modal segmentation model
based on U-Net and transformer architectures [39] uses a large
number of labels generated by a non-deep-learning algorithm
[19]. However, all these studies do not systematically evaluate
how dataset size affects model performance, leaving no guid-
ance on the annotation effort needed for researchers. Moreover,
these experiments use 3T or 1.5T MRI data, so the required
amount of annotation for lower-field MRI data like our 0.55T
dataset remains unknown. In addition, we investigate how a
semi-supervised component may help to address the annota-
tion scarcity issue in speech MRI segmentation. While previ-
ous work generally shows semi-supervised learning improves
model performance especially in low-data settings [40, 41], pos-
sible degradation has also been reported [42, 43]. We imple-
ment a teacher-student framework based on the supervised fine-
tuned weights. The teacher generates pseudo-labels for unan-
notated images, enabling the student model to learn from them
[40]. Our questions are: How much can semi-supervised learn-
ing narrow the gap to fully supervised performance in MRI lar-
ynx segmentation with limited labels? In addition, we illus-
trate the application of the larynx segmentation results through a
sample phonetic study of laryngeal dynamics in Mandarin tone
production. The results show that this method can capture vari-
ous spatiotemporal patterns of laryngeal movements.
2. Methods
2.1. Dataset
The mid-sagittal real-time MRI data are collected on a 0.55T
scanner following a speech production protocol, with simulta-
neous audio and respiratory recordings (see [12, 13, 20, 44, 45]
for more details). Participants’ head position is adjusted during
setup to maximize laryngeal coverage by the speech coil and
minimize tilt, facilitating selection of a mid-sagittal slice cap-
turing key laryngeal structures.
The data have a spatial resolution of 2.3 × 2.3 mm² (104 ×
104 pixels) and are reconstructed at a frame rate of 99 f/s. The
dataset includes speakers of diverse tone languages, including
Mandarin (Mnd), Cantonese (Cnt), Yoruba (Yrb) and Tswana
(Tswn). The labeled dataset consists of MRI recordings from
two Mandarin speakers and four Yoruba speakers performing
tone and intonation tasks (word and sentence reading), along
with larynx annotations. It is partitioned into training (794),
validation (251), and test sets (235, see Table 1). An additional
unlabeled set (14,456) includes data from the Mandarin and
Yoruba speakers present in the labeled training set, as well as
from three Cantonese, three Tswana and five additional Man-
darin speakers not included in the labeled training set. The
data are collected from speech tasks such as tone and intonation
for Yoruba and Tswana, and passage or spontaneous speech for
Mandarin and Cantonese.
The images in the labeled dataset are annotated by a pho-
netician/speech scientist (see Figure 1, left panel). Keypoint
boundaries are annotated for six laryngeal structures: thyroid
cartilage, ventricle, vocal folds, arytenoid cartilages, epiglot-
tis, and ventricular folds. The thyroid cartilage is marked as a
closed contour extending from the upper to lower margins of
the vocal folds. The precise shape of this structure is often un-
clear in speech MRI, but its relative position is most relevant
for pitch control studies. Following [26], we annotate it as a
contour roughly parallel to the neck. The ventricle is annotated
as a cavity-like contour between the thyroid and arytenoid carti-
lages. Single-line keypoints are used to annotate the lower vocal
fold boundary, upper ventricular fold boundary, arytenoid car-
tilages and epiglottis. All these keypoint annotations are then
transformed into binary masks. For the vocal folds, the mask
is formed by connecting the lower ventricle points to the lower
vocal fold boundary, and for the ventricular folds, the mask is
formed by connecting the upper ventricle points to the upper
ventricular folds boundary. For all other structures, the closed
polygons formed by the boundary annotation are rasterized to
generate the masks. Images and annotations are rescaled to
1024 × 1024 pixels before being fed into the model.
Table 1:Real-time MRI dataset splits
Set Speaker (ID, sex) Language # Images
Training 01M, 10M Mnd 146, 73
02F, 03F, 05F, 07F Yrb 139, 157, 144, 135
Validation 07M Mnd 95
06F Yrb 156
Test 03M Mnd 88
08F Yrb 147
Unlabeled 01M, 10M Mnd 855, 855
02F, 06F, 08M, 12F, 13M Mnd 855, 855, 855, 855, 855
02F, 03F, 05F, 07F Yrb 861, 864, 792, 803
02F, 04M, 05F Cnt 855, 855, 855
02M, 03F, 08F Tswn 868, 850, 868
2.2. Model and evaluation
We use the Mask2Former architecture with a ResNet-50 back-
bone [38]. The model is initialized with pretrained weights from
the large-scale COCO (Common Objects in Context) dataset
[46], providing feature representations learned from diverse nat-
ural images that can be fine-tuned for the larynx semantic seg-
mentation task in MRI. This fully supervised training stage is
conducted using the Detectron2 engine [47].
To leverage the large amount of unlabeled data, we im-
plement a semi-supervised refinement stage using a Mean
Teacher–style framework [40]. A teacher model, initialized
with weights from the fully supervised baseline, generates
pseudo-labels for unlabeled images, while the student model is
trained on these pseudo-labels and images alongside the labeled
data. The teacher predictions are made on weakly augmented
unlabeled images (resizing only), and only those exceeding a
confidence threshold of 0.85 are retained as pseudo-labels for
supervising the student. The student receives the same unla-
555
Figure 1:Illustration of larynx annotation and the model architecture.
beled images but with strong augmentations [48], including ran-
dom Rician noise and blur. The student is optimized via back-
propagation, while the teacher model weightsθT are updated as
an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) of the Student weights
θS with smoothing coefficientα= 0.999:
θT ,t =αθ T ,t−1 + (1−α)θ S,t (1)
The student is trained with a composite loss function, with a
weight factorλ= 0.5:
Ltotal =L labeled +λL unlabeled (2)
To examine the effects of dataset size, we run the same pipeline
using different fractions of each participant’s annotations (dif-
ferent labeled data % conditions): 1%, 2.5%, 5%, 7.5%, 10%,
25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%. Final model performance is evalu-
ated on the test set using Average Precision (AP) and Dice Sim-
ilarity Coefficient (DSC). The AP measures how well a model
balances precision (few false positives) and recall (few missed
true objects), with a higher value indicating better overall detec-
tion and segmentation performance. The DSC measures overlap
between predicted and ground-truth masks, with higher values
indicating better segmentation quality and boundary agreement.
2.3. Phonetic analysis
We demonstrate the application of the method by analyzing the
audio and MRI data from four Mandarin speakers performing a
tone production task (192 tokens, 4 speakers x 6 syllables [pa],
[pha], [ma], [ta], [tha], [na], and [la] X 4 tones X 2 repetitions).
The f0 trajectory is extracted from the audio using Praat’s
autocorrelation algorithm implemented in Parselmouth [49].
For MRI analysis, predicted masks are generated per frame us-
ing the final semi-supervised weights of 25% and 100% condi-
tions to visualize whether they yield qualitatively different re-
sults. Five laryngeal variables are analyzed: vocal fold length,
larynx height, thyroid angle, vertical ventricle distance and
aryepiglottic distance. V ocal fold length, a key determinant of
f0 [50], is estimated as the extent of the vocal fold mask along
its anterior–posterior axis, derived using PCA. Larynx height is
calculated as the average y-coordinate of all the masks. Vertical
larynx movement has been suggested to contribute to f0 control
by modulating vocal fold length and vertical tension [51, 52].
The thyroid angle is measured as the tilt of the vertical PCA-
derived axis of the thyroid cartilage relative to the horizontal
image axis. This measure is intended to approximate cricothy-
roid rotation, where forward thyroid tilt (smaller angle) length-
ens the vocal folds and raises f0 [32, 33]. The vertical ventricle
distance is defined as the average vertical gap across the ventri-
cle air space, measured parallel to the same vertical thyroid axis
by sampling multiple slices. This measure is expected to de-
crease in laryngeal constriction involving ventricular incursion,
where the ventricular folds are medially adducted and approx-
imate over vocal folds [1, 11]. The aryepiglottic distance is
calculated as the mean gap between the epiglottis and arytenoid
cartilages across slices along the ventricle’s anterior–posterior
axis, defined by its leftmost and rightmost points. This measure
also reflects laryngeal constriction, capturing mechanisms such
as aryepiglottic sphinctering [1, 11].
To visualize the f0 and laryngeal time series for each tone,
laryngeal measures are linearly interpolated to align with the
timestamps of f0 for each production trial. The time axis is
normalized to 15 equally spaced points, and the average f0 and
laryngeal trajectories are calculated across all tokens.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Larynx segmentation performance
Figure 2:Solid lines: AP and DSC scores (left y axis) by labeled
data % (x axis) and model (supervised, red vs semi-supervised,
blue). Transparent lines: marginal gain over the previous (right
y axis). Dotted line: 5% marginal gain threshold.
Figure 2 shows the AP and DSC scores as a function of
the labeled training data portion. Both AP and DSC increase
sharply in the low-data region, but their growth slows as the la-
beled data portion becomes larger. The AP margin gain drops
below a 5% threshold once about 60% of the labeled data is
used, while for DSC, its margin gain falls below 5% after
roughly 25% of the labeled data. These results suggest that,
beyond roughly∼33–79 annotations per speaker, the returns di-
minish substantially using a 5% marginal gain threshold. While
additional performance gains after 60% may still be relevant in
clinical settings, they may be less critical for linguistic-phonetic
research. Figure 2 also shows that semi-supervised learning im-
proves performance over supervised baseline mostly in low- to
556
mid-data conditions. The semi-supervised gain diminishes as
more labeled data becomes available. This pattern aligns with
findings reported in prior semi-supervised work [40, 41]. How-
ever, the semi-supervised boost is overall modest and cannot
replace high-quality annotations. Moreover, our results seem to
show degraded semi-supervised performance over supervised
performance under the 2.5% data condition for DSC.
Table 2 presents the scores and semi-supervised gains for
each structure, averaged across labeled data % conditions. The
larger structures like arytenoid cartilage, epiglottis, and vocal
folds achieve higher scores than smaller ones like ventricle and
ventricular folds. The difficulty in segmenting the latter two
structures may also be due to their more deformable shapes.
Thyroid cartilage is the most challenging one, as its shape can-
not be clearly determined in most existing real-time speech
MRI data. The current results highlight the challenge of la-
ryngeal segmentation, which involves much smaller structures
compared with the vocal tract segmentation task. For semi-
supervised gains, the arytenoid and ventricular folds show slight
decrease in DSC performance. Potential performance degrada-
tion is a major concern in the semi-supervised learning literature
[42]. Understanding the conditions that cause it and developing
more robust algorithms will be crucial to addressing this issue.
Table 2:Model Performance and SSL Gains by Structure
Structure AP↑DSC↑AP SSL gain DSCSSL gain
Arytenoid Cartilage 0.527 0.861 0.0209 -0.00353
Epiglottis 0.320 0.781 0.00232 0.00452
V ocal Folds 0.302 0.779 0.0398 0.0142
Ventricular Folds 0.144 0.670 0.0141 -0.00829
Ventricle 0.133 0.660 0.0332 0.0300
Thyroid Cartilage 0.125 0.656 0.0184 0.0118
3.2. Laryngeal dynamics of Mandarin tones
Figure 3:F0 and laryngeal dynamics of Mandarin tones by la-
beled data % (25%: transparent dashed; 100%: solid)
Figure 3 illustrates the grand-averaged time course of f0
and five laryngeal variables across the four Mandarin tones. The
trajectories for the 25% and 100% labeled-data conditions are
largely similar, except for some discrepancies for the thyroid
angle measure, suggesting that additional annotations may be
needed for this variable. In addition, all laryngeal variables ex-
hibit tone-specific differences. Our results show that dynamical
vocal fold length changes can be successfully analyzed from
mid-sagittal real-time MRI, and that vocal fold length closely
tracks f0. The larynx height also mimics f0, consistent with
previous reports [1, 53]. This measure may be considered as
reflecting a synergistic component of f0, or, as [36] suggests,
an relatively independent articulatory representation of pitch
register. Our results further extends previous laryngeal stud-
ies [1, 16, 37], by showing that real-time MRI can effectively
capture intrinsic laryngeal dynamics underlying tone produc-
tion, as reflected by the thyroid tilt measure. The thyroid tilt
angle seems to be noisier than the other measures but remains
informative: higher-pitched portions of Tone 1, 2 and 4 gen-
erally show smaller angle than lower-pitched portions of Tone
2, 3 and 4, likely indicating forward tilting of thyroid cartilage
for vocal fold lengthening and pitch elevation [32, 33]. How
extrinsic laryngeal components like larynx height and other in-
trinsic laryngeal components synergize to influence vocal fold
length and pitch regulation in tone and intonation production re-
mains an open question. If f0 is the target for tone [34, 35], we
would expect greater variability for lower-level motor compo-
nents than the more stable f0 tonal goals. Speaker-level analyses
with more sophisticated statistical and computational modeling,
are needed to address this issue.
Real-time MRI further enables us to capture spatiotemporal
patterns of laryngeal constrictions. Both vertical ventricle and
aryepiglottic distance measures decrease over time, especially
in the initial portion, likely reflecting pharyngeal or laryngeal
constriction in /a/. However, tone-specific differences remain
evident: Tones 3 and 4 show a larger reduction in both measures
at low f0 towards the syllable end, indicating greater laryngeal
constriction. The constriction effect appears to extend broadly
along the laryngeal tube, affecting both the middle ventricle and
the upper vestibular regions. These findings are consistent with
previous acoustic, ultrasonic and laryngoscopic studies show-
ing the occurrence of laryngeal constriction, or creaky voice in
Mandarin low tones [1, 54]. Moreover, [1] observes that laryn-
geal constriction is often accompanied by a higher larynx. They
propose two strategies for low-tone production: (1) larynx rais-
ing with a constricted laryngeal tube (tense, harsh, and creaky
voice), and (2) larynx lowering with an elongated laryngeal tube
(breathy or modal voice). However, our results seem to indicate
laryngeal constriction with a lowered larynx in low tones, e.g,
for Tone 3. These differences likely reflect speaker-specific mo-
tor strategies for laryngeal constrictions. Speaker-specific anal-
yses with a larger dataset could further elucidate this issue and
facilitate the development of a theory of laryngeal constriction
dynamics in tone and intonation contrasts, as well as phonation
and voicing distinctions [23, 54, 11, 55, 56].
4. Conclusion
This study presents a larynx segmentation and analysis pipeline
for mid-sagittal real-time MRI using Mask2Former with su-
pervised learning plus semi-supervised refinement. Our results
show that sufficient segmentation can be achieved with∼33-79
annotations per participant (25%-60% of the 794 labeled sam-
ples / 6 participants) using a 5% marginal gain threshold, af-
ter which gains diminish. Semi-supervised learning modestly
improves performance in mid- to low-data regimes, but gains
are small and occasionally negative. A 