Learning to Wait: Real Streaming Speech-to-Text Translation with an LLM
Shucong Zhang ID 1,∗, Titouan Parcollet ID 1,∗, Rogier C. van Dalen ID 1,∗
1 Samsung, AI Center-Cambridge, United Kingdom
{s1.zhang,t.parcollet,r.vandalen}@samsung.com
Abstract
A streaming speech-to-text translation system outputs tokens as
the audio comes in. The state of the art for streaming speech
translation with an LLM is Bestow. Bestow’s wait policy is
fixed: it outputs tokens at a fixed cadence irrespective of the
contents of the audio. On a test set, it often seems to perform
well, but not in the real world. If no speech is heard imme-
diately after the microphone is opened, then the fixed policy
will force tokens out and produce hallucinations; if the speaker
speaks fast, the system will fall behind. This paper instead pro-
poses a wait policy that learns when to wait for more audio and
when to emit tokens. On a test set, the model that uses this pol-
icy achieve better quality and/or better latency. Moreover, it is
not susceptible to hallucinations for real-world data.
Index Terms: speech translation, streaming translation
1. Introduction
Automatic speech-to-text translation has in recent years become
good enough for practical use. Recently, it has become pos-
sible to integrate a pre-trained large language model (LLM),
which brings many helpful textual capabilities. In deployment
of speech-to-text translation, e.g. in a system helping with con-
versations or automatic subtitling, it is often necessary for the
system to stream its output as the input audio comes in.
However, the wait policy, the module that decides when to
wait and when to emit tokens, in current LLM-based speech-to-
text translation systems is a “wait-kpolicy” (e.g. [1]). For trans-
lating text, a wait-kpolicy means to wait forkwords of input
and then start generating one word of output for each word in
the input. When translating speech, this type of policy, instead
of counting input words, counts chunks of audio. On standard
test sets, which usually have short utterances that are consis-
tently segmented, this may seem to work. But in the real world,
the effects of this type of fixed policy are undesirable.
If the microphone is opened a few seconds before the
speaker starts, the system will start by hallucinating output. If
the speaker is slow or hesitates, the system will also produce
unnecessary or hallucinated tokens. If the speaker is fast, the
system will fall further and further behind, and start leaving out
translations for some phrases. These are all bad failure modes.
Section 2 will therefore propose a learnable wait policy. It
is a function both of the audio heard so far, and of the text gener-
ated so far. Training minimises a multi-task objective. Section
2 will explain how, since at training time both the time align-
ment and the target text are known, this can be implemented
efficiently.
*These authors contributed equally.
Section 3 will discuss the experimental set-up. In par-
ticular, it will introduce SilFleurs, the Fleurs test set with si-
lence prepended to every utterance. This straightforward-to-
reproduce test set exposes one of the flaws in using a fixed pol-
icy in speech-to-text translation. The results of experiments, in
Section 4, will show that the new wait policy yields a better
latency-quality trade-off, but mostly that the performance es-
sentially does not change when adding silence to the test set.
1.1. Existing Work on Speech-to-Text Translation
Traditional speech-to-text translation systems had acascaded
architecture, where the best hypothesis from a speech recog-
niser was piped into a text-to-text translation system [2]. Then,
with the advent of encoder-decoder systems for text-to-text ma-
chine translation [3], it became possible to swap the text tokens
for speech tokens [4, 5, 6]. These systems are attractive for
a few reasons. They avoid compounding errors in the speech
recognition and the translation. Also, the non-textual informa-
tion in the audio [7] could improve the translations.
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have become pop-
ular. Pretrained LLMs can often already perform text-based
tasks, which makes it more straightforward, by conditioning
them on speech input, to teach them speech recognition [8], or,
relevant to this paper, speech-to-text translation [9, 10, 1].
Whether the translation integrates an LLM or not, stream-
ing translation provides an additional challenge. Since output
must be generated before the end of an utterance, the system
must decide when to wait for more audio and when there is
enough information to output tokens. This task is performed by
a “wait policy” [4]. A “wait-kpolicy”, which outputs one word
for each input word, may be useful in a cascaded system [11],
where words can be counted. If, on the other hand, the input is
speech, a wait-kpolicy outputs a token for each chunk of audio
[1]. However, in the real world, there is no reason for the speed
of the speech to match the wait-kpolicy’s assumption.
Therefore, this paper will propose to introduce a learned
wait policy for LLM-based speech translation. This has been
done for cascaded systems and encoder-decoder systems [4, 6,
5, 12]. However, for LLM-based systems, the state of the art is
still to use a fixed policy [1].
One type of learned wait policy is continuous integrate-
and-fire [13]. This type of wait policy has not been used with
SpeechLLM, but there is a problem with continuous integrate-
and-fire: it is not conditioned on the tokens output so far. Its
task is therefore to decide when tokens should be emitted with-
out knowing the identity of these tokens. Since this is a funda-
mental flaw of continuous integrate-and-fire, this paper will not
consider it.
5312
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1323
a1
 a2
 a3
 Audio
Speech encoder
e1
 e2
 e3
w0
start
w1
 w2
Conditioning
network
LLM
This
 is
Wait policy
W
 W
 E
 E
w0 · · ·
 wu
Tokens
e1 . . .
 et
Encoded audio
Self-attention
k v q
Cross-attention
k v q
h1,u
Cross-attention
k v q
h2,u
Wait
Emit
RMS Norm
Attention
RMS Norm
Feed-forward
k v q
(a)The internal structure of
the attention layer, which takes
key/value vectors and query vec-
tors.
(b)The structure of the proposed wait policy.
At each step, the output is conditioned on the
encoded audioe 1...t up to timet, and the cur-
rent token historyw 0...u.
(c)The way the LLM’s output is conditioned on the speech
input is by the “Conditioning network”, which uses cross-
attention. To keep the pre-trained LLM, cross-attention lay-
ers are inserted before the LLM.
Figure 1:The structure of the proposed system. Left: the attention layer. Middle: the wait policy. Right: the complete system.
2. Learning when to Emit: the Wait Policy
The architecture proposed in this paper is shown in figure 1c.
It is derived from Bestow [1], with which it has in common
that there is a speech encoder, a large language model (LLM),
and a conditioning network before the LLM. The conditioning
network gives the LLM access to the speech input without hav-
ing to change the first layers of the LLM from self-attention
to cross-attention. It is built from a self-attention layer that
takes the tokensw, a cross-attention that attends to the en-
coded speechE, another self-attention layer and another cross-
attention layer.
Instead of using the “wait policy” in figure 1c, standard Be-
stow uses a fixed policy to decide on the timing of tokens. Be-
stow’s “wait-k” policy waits forkaudio chunks, and then forces
out a token every chunk. When tested on a test set, the perfor-
mance might look good enough. Most test sets have relatively
short utterances, surrounded by a consistent amount of silence.
The real world is different. Users may turn on the microphone
well before starting to speak, causing the original Bestow to
hallucinate. They may also speak for a few minutes (unlike the
evaluation data), and speak quickly, so that the original Bestow
with its fixed cadence falls irretrievably behind, or slowly, so
again tokens must be hallucinated.
Instead, this paper proposes a learned wait policy, which de-
cides when to wait for more audio and when to emit a token. Its
input is the audio up to the current time, and the tokens emitted
so far. At each step, the wait policy outputs a two-dimensional
probability distribution over the next actionθ: “wait”W, or
“emit”E. If the search algorithm decides to emit, the LLM is
run to generate the next token and inputs it to the wait policy. If
the search algorithm decides to wait, it waits for the next audio
chunk and runs the wait policy again.
2.1. Decoding
At the current stepiin search, the wait policy’s actions so far
can be written asθ 1...θ i. Writing the current time ast(θ 1:i)
(the number ofWactions plus one), the audio seen so far is
a1,...,a t(θ1:i). Similarly, write the number of words gener-
ated asu(θ 1:i)(the number ofEactions), and the words output
so far arew 1,...,w u(θ1:i). The output of the wait policy is
then a distribution overθ i+1 that depends on the history of au-
dio, and tokens:
P(θi+1|a1:t(θ1:i),w 1:u(θ1:i))(1a)
Ifθi+1 =W, a new audio chunk is added to the input, and the
process repeats. Ifθ i+1 =E, the word to be emitted is chosen
from the LLM:
P(wi+1|a1:t(θ1:i),θ 1:i+1,w 1:u(θ1:i)),(1b)
which depends on the complete history (including, through ex-
isting keys and values, the history of wait policy actions).
Figure 1b zooms in on the wait policy that implements
equation (1a) during search: it is producing an output for a
single time steptand a single point in the token sequence
u. It starts with self-attention on the tokens emitted so far.
Then, it cross-attends to the encoded audio. The figure shows
just the hidden vectors for token indexugoing into the cross-
attention block. Figure 1a shows the detailed structure of the
self-attention and the cross-attention layers. Both self- and
cross-attention blocks have pre-normalization residual connec-
tion after self-attention and after the feed forward network. In-
puts to each block are normalised.
2.2. Training
During training, unlike in (1), it is not necessary to interleave
evaluating the wait policy and the LLM, since both the complete
reference alignmentΘ ={θ 1,...θ T+U }and the complete tar-
get word sequencew={w 0,...,w U }are available. Instead,
the wait policy is trained on all steps in the alignment at once,
and the LLM is trained on all tokens in the word sequence at
once. The two losses are summed to form the overall loss.
To compute the wait policy loss, the self-attention layers
in Figure 1b simply receive all tokens, with a “causal” atten-
tion mask, so each token only attends to the history. The cross-
attention layers, however, are a function of not only the words,
but also the audio up to the current step. The reference align-
ment hasT+Usteps, which means that the wait policy, and
5313
therefore the cross-attention layers, must be evaluated atT+U
pairs of(t,u), sometimes withtrepeated, sometimesu. The
first cross-attention layer therefore takes the output of the last
self-attention layer with vectors repeated according to the se-
quence ofu’s, and with a cross-attention mask given by the se-
quence oft’s.
3. Experimental Set-Up
This section describes the model design (section 3.1), the met-
rics (section 3.2), and the sets for training, evaluation and test
(section 3.3) used to compare the different streaming and offline
speech translation systems.
3.1. Models
This article investigates two families of models: Bestow, from
which our system is derived, and a concatenated baseline. Start-
ing from the proposed system, four main components must be
defined: the speech encoder, the wait policy, a large language
model and the conditioning network linking the LLM inputs to
the speech encoder output.
Speech encoder .Features are extracted using a Conformer
model made of 22 layers for a total of 300M of trainable pa-
rameters. Prior to the Conformer, a two-layered 2D CNN
is employed to downsample the Mel Filterbanks from a fre-
quency of 100 frames per seconds to 25 frames per second.
The obtained features are then downsampled once again af-
ter the Conformer encoder to 12.5 frames per second using
a simple concatenation of consecutive frames. This architec-
ture is first pre-trained using self-supervised learning follow-
ing the BEST-RQ approach [14] and dynamic chunk training
[15] on the Loquacious dataset [16]. Then, it is fine-tuned on
the translation task once plugged to the rest of the system.
The wait policyis a modified Transformer decoder. It starts
with two linear projections and normalisation ensuring that
the speech and text embeddings have the same feature di-
mension. Input tokens are then passed into a RoPE [17] self-
attention layer of size 768 and a two-layered feed-forward
network with GeLU non-linearity of size 1,024. The ex-
panded sequence is further forwarded to two blocks contain-
ing a cross attention layer and a two-layered feed-forward
network with GeLU non-linearity. Text and speech embed-
dings are queries and keys respectively. The wait policy has
30M parameters. The wait policy is trained from scratch
with the translation task. For training, the expansion of the
queries, i.e. input text embeddings, described in section 2.2 to
obtain all the relevant combination of(t,u)is then applied.
The LLMis an in-house LLM with 3B parameters. Its param-
eters are frozen and LoRA of rank 8 is applied to all dense
layers during fine-tuning on the translation task.
The conditioning networkadds 2 new Transformer decoder
layers at the start of the LLM. These layers use cross-
attention to process speech embeddings, thereby condition-
ing the text embeddings on the speech input before feed-
ing it to the LLM. The network architecture consists of two
repetitions of the following sequence: normalization, self-
attention, cross-attention, and a feed-forward network, with
pre-normalization residual connections at each step. Posi-
tional encoding is implemented using RoPE [17]. Each layer
has 8 attention heads and a dimension size of 1,536. One
project layer is added at each end of the conditioning net-
work to first reduce the embedding size from 3,072 to 1,536,
and then to upscale it back to 3,072. The network is trained
from scratch with causal masking, treating tokens as queries
and speech embeddings as keys. A special “end-of-speech”
embedding is added to the speech embedding sequence to let
the LLM know out the end of the audio stream.
The concatenated baseline uses the same speech encoder
and LLM and concatenates the prompt, the speech embeddings,
and by the translation tokens. The Bestow model with a fixed,
“wait-k”, policy, always emits its first token after 1280 ms. The
audio chunk length is 640 ms. We add the dynamic wait policy
named AlignAtt. [18] as a baseline. Briefly, AlignAtt decides
to wait or emit depending on the argmax of the cross-attention
score between the current token and the speech embeddings.
This is just a different decoding algorithm applied to the Be-
stow model trained with a fixed policy. In our experiment, the
window size defined in [18] is set to 32. All Bestow models
are trained with the Adam optimiser for 180,000 steps on the
CoLiMu dataset (section 3.3) with a batch size of total duration
600 seconds on four A100 GPUs. The concatenated baseline
is trained for 120,000 steps. All models are implemented and
trained with SpeechBrain [19].
3.2. Metrics
The metrics to understand the performance of the translation
systems in this paper are both the translation quality and the
latency. Translation quality is measured by the COMET score
[20] with the“wmt22-comet-da”model. The COMET scores
assign a translation quality and accuracy score between 0 and 1
(higher is better) given a reference translation, a reference tran-
scription and the predicted translation.
To evaluate the streaming, the averagelogical latencyis
used. This metric is similar to average lagging [11] computed
using time instead of tokens like [12]. The logical emission time
is the point in the audio when the model has enough information
to emit the token. This is like the “NCA” metric in [12]. This
value is averaged over all tokens emitted for the test set, rather
than just the ones emitted before the end of the audio, to allow a
comparison with non-streaming offline systems. Like [11, 12],
the reference, is an impossible imaginary system that generates
tokens evenly spread throughout the audio.
3.3. Datasets
Two language directions are considered: English to Korean and
English to French. Speech-to-text translation training is done
with a concatenation of three datasets: LibriSpeech [21], Com-
monV oicev14.0[22], and MuST-C [23], resulting in roughly
3,700 hours of audio. For LibriSpeech and CommonV oice,
target text translations are automatically obtained with GPT-4
[24] for English to Korean and QWEN-14B [25] for English to
French, by prompting a translation task from the English tran-
scriptions. Target alignments for the wait policy are generated
in two steps: (1) English speech to English text and time stamps
with the Nvidia NeMo Neural Forced Aligner; (2) and English
text to target text by prompting QWEN-14B to output matching
phrases. The timing in the speech of each English token is then
automatically matched to each target phrase.
Evaluation is performed with the Korean and French vali-
dation and test sets of Fleurs [26]. An extra set, named “Sil-
Fleurs”, is created to highlight the catastrophic failure of Be-
stow in the presence of pauses and noises. SilFleurs is obtained
by prepending 5 seconds of “noise-free-sound-0683” from the
Musan dataset [27] at −20 dB to the test set of Fleurs.
5314
Table 1:English→French: comparison of streaming transla-
tion with wait policy with the baselines. SilFleurs is Fleurs with
5 s of low-level noise prepended to show the effect of opening
the microphone before the speech starts.
Model Wait Fleurs test SilFleurs
policy COMET Latency COMET
Concat. Offline 0.821 5.20 s 0.821
Bestow 0.782 5.20 s 0.781
Bestow Fixed 0.767 3.57 s 0.593
Bestow AlignAtt. 0.754 2.56 s 0.650
Bestow Learned 0.767 1.72 s 0.745
Table 2:English→Korean: comparison of streaming transla-
tion with wait policy with the baselines. SilFleurs is Fleurs with
5 s of low-level noise prepended to show the effect of opening
the microphone before the speech starts.
Model Wait Fleurs test SilFleurs
policy COMET Latency COMET
Concat. Offline 0.889 5.20 s 0.882
Bestow 0.881 5.20 s 0.882
Bestow Fixed 0.814 2.59 s 0.486
Bestow AlignAtt. 0.840 2.60 s 0.675
Bestow Learned 0.820 2.37 s 0.820
4. Experimental Results
This section will compare translation systems on both quality
and latency (section 3.2) on the Fleurs test sets. Two language
pairs will be used: one with two related languages, English to
French, and a pair of unrelated languages, English to Korean.
First, consider translating English to French, in Ta-
ble 1. The “concatenated” offline system is sometimes called
“decoder-only”: the encoded speech is fed as tokens into the
context window of the LLM. It provides the best translation
quality (COMET score), but it does not stream. The latency
is essentially half the average length of the utterances in Fleurs,
weighted by the number of tokens. Bestow in offline mode, i.e.
conditioning the LLM on speech with cross-attention instead
of speech tokens in the LLM context, reduces quality slightly,
but of course yields the same latency. While the concatenated
system is not much affected by the addition of silence from Sil-
Fleurs, the offline Bestow suffers a slight degradation in trans-
lation quality, from 0.833 to 0.810. Latency measurements on
SilFleurs are not given as they would simply be equal to the
standard Fleurs test set latencies shifted by the duration of the
added silence. The reported latency of 5.20s does not look bad,
but would be much worse on longer utterances.
Moving on to the streaming systems, the state-of-the-art
Bestow with a fixed wait policy reduces the quality, but it does
also reduce the latency from 5.20 s to 3.57 s. It waits for 1.28 s,
and then outputs a token every 640 ms. However, when silence
is added to the beginning of the test utterance (SilFleurs), the
fixed wait policy forces the system to hallucinate text, which
drastically reduces the quality: the COMET score drops from
0.767 to 0.593. On the other hand, by replacing the fixed wait
policy by a learned one, as this paper proposes, translation qual-
ity only drops slightly from 0.767 to 0.745 on SilFleurs while
Quality: COMET score
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9System, wait policy
Concatenated, ofﬂine
Bestow, ofﬂine
Bestow, ﬁxed
Bestow, learned
Fleurs
SilFleurs
Figure 2:English→Korean: the effect on the translation per-
formance of evaluating on Fleurs vs SilFleurs, i.e. of prepend-
ing 5 s of silence to the evaluation audio files. The offline sys-
tems are essentially unaffected. The Bestow systems with fixed
chunk size start hallucinating after 1.28 s, which ruins the the
translation quality. Bestow with a learning wait policy, pro-
posed in this work, is unaffected by the additional silence.
retaining the same COMET score on the standard Fleurs test set,
but the latency does reduce significantly from 3.57 s to 1.72 s.
While being more robust to silences and pauses, the proposed
approach translates sooner than the fixed streaming Bestow.
Table 2 shows the same comparison for English to Korean,
and Figure 2 highlights the effect of adding silence to the be-
ginning of the test utterances (SilFleurs). For the streaming
systems, the story is very similar to English to French. How-
ever, since Korean and English are more different than French
and English, the learned wait policy more often waits for a com-
plete phrase to finish, and therefore has a higher latency.1 What
is immediately obvious is that one system fails catastrophically
on SilFleurs: Bestow with a fixed wait policy. For streaming
translation, then, the learned wait policy from this paper is far
superior to the state-of-the-art fixed wait policy from [1].
One objection could be that it would be straightforward
to make Bestow with a fixed wait policy work on SilFleurs,
by introducing a “silence” token in the training data. How-
ever, SilFleurs is just a trivially reproducible test set that high-
lights a general problem with a fixed wait policy. In the real
world, speakers might speak slowly with many ‘err‘”s, which
will cause hallucinations. Or speakers might speak faster, and
since real-world utterances are likely longer than 10 seconds,
the system might fall behind. In contrast, the learned wait policy
proposed in this paper entirely resolves the general issue. From
the identical COMET scores on both Fleurs and SilFleurs, it is
clear that during pauses or silences, the policy makes correct
decisions about whether to wait or emit tokens.
5. Conclusion
This paper has proposed a learned wait policy for the Bestow
architecture for streaming speech-to-text translation. Bestow
originally used a “wait-k” wait policy, a fixed policy that out-
puts tokens at a fixed cadence, which is likely to be wrong for
real-life data. The wait policy in this paper, on the other hand,
learns when to wait and when to emit tokens. The experiments
have shown that this wait policy reaches significantly lower la-
tencies while preserving the translation quality. Additionally, it
also shows that as soon as silence is prepended to utterances,
Bestow with a fixed wait policy fails dramatically while this pa-
per’s learned wait policy retains the same translation quality.
1That the system with fixed wait policy has a different latency is due
to the number of output tokens.
5315
6. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI was used to finish some sentences.