Intonation Perception in Real and Synthetic Speech across Varying Familiarity 
Levels: A Pilot Study of Equivalence Assessment 
Hanrui Zhou1,*, Gaoyuan Zhang1,*, Yixiang Chen1, Yujie Xing2, Feng Xu1, Xurong Xie1,**, Hui 
Chen1,** 
1 Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 
2 Capital Normal University 
annxx_zhr@163.com, zhanggaoyuan2023@iscas.ac.cn, chenyixiang24@mails.ucas.ac.cn, 
xingyujie010211@163.com, feng.xu2@hdr.mq.edu.au, xurong@iscas.ac.cn, chenhui@iscas.ac.cn 
 
Abstract 
Language training relies on a corpus constructed by a large 
number linguistic materials. AI- powered voice clones provide 
a way to construct the corpus with relatively low cost. Singing 
voice conversion (SVC) model is used to generate synthetic 
voices. This  study compares participants ’ performances on 
natural and synthetic speech in two experiments, similarity 
perception and intonation recognition. In the accuracy of 
similarity perception task, a significant interaction between 
speech type and intonation is found, suggesting that questi on 
may serve as a cue for speaker identification but may be 
influenced by synthetic features. In the accuracy of intonation 
recognition task, a significant interaction between speech type 
and familiarity is observed, indicating that speech type affects 
how much familiarity contributes to voice processing. 
Index Terms: AI-powered voice clones, intonation perception, 
speaker familiarity 
1. Introduction  
In recent years, there has been growing recognition of the vital 
links between verbal communication and people’s social and 
individual functioning. Language training serves as a 
fundamental approach on improving communicative ability, 
particularly in areas such as language acquisition and 
intervention for language disorders.  One of the important 
factors for language training is the construction of high-quality 
corpora that contain specific linguistic data. However, such 
corpora are currently scarce [1]. An ideal high -quality corpus 
should encompass rich linguistic information, including 
speakers’ identity and prosodic features (e.g., intonation, 
emotion prosody), to support the complex cognitive processes 
involved in language learning [2]. Yet building such a corpus 
requires substantial investment making it both economically 
and temporally costly,  such as demanding skilled actors, 
controlled recording environments, and large data volumes. 
Thus, the lack of well -resourced corpora poses a significant 
challenge to advancing both research and practice in language 
training. 
With the rapid development of AI voice cloning technology, 
it has become increasingly feasible to generate high -quality 
linguistic materials for speech training using synthetic voices. 
Recent studies have primarily focused on evaluating synthetic 
speech in  terms of intelligibility, naturalness and speaker 
identity similarity [3, 4]. It has been shown that people are 
poorly equipped to detect AI -powered voice clones [5]. 
Research has shown that people are often unable to reliably 
distinguish AI-g enerated voi ces from human speech [5] , and 
although listeners perform slightly better at voice 
discrimination than at image discrimination, they are still 
 
*These authors contributed equally. 
**Corresponding authors. 
deceived most of the time  [6, 7, 8]. However, mo st existing 
evaluations are based on declarative sentences [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. 
In Mandarin, question intonation is sometimes  unmarked 
lexically. Intonation plays a central role in signaling question, 
particularly through a finally rising or high- level f₀ contour [9, 
10, 11]. Intonation is a key component of natural speech, 
contributing significantly to its acoustic complexity [9], and 
remains a persistent challenge for voice cloning systems to fully 
replicate [12, 13]. Given that it is frequent in daily 
communication and constitute an essential part of language 
training, it is crucial to assess whether current AI-generated 
voices can accurately produce such prosodic distinctions. 
There is evidence shown that familiarity with a talker's 
characteristics help facilitate linguistic processing  [14]. 
Familiar voices help people identify the speakers and promote 
recovery of acoustic properties. Some studies attribute it to 
adaption. Speech perception is of adaption , d ifference in 
response between learned knowledge and strange stimulus or 
new acoustic patterns that haven't be learned before [15] . 
Adaptation effects often manifest as reduced reaction times and 
more stable categorization following brief exposure. In 
intervention contexts, repeated exposure is inherent to training 
paradigms [2]. Therefore, examining familiarity effects is 
crucial for evaluating the practical feasibility of AI-powered 
voice clones. 
To address the gap, the present study compares 2 speech 
types (synthetic and natural voices) on different intonation 
(statement and question) and familiarity (familiar and strange) 
levels in two experiments, speaker identity similarity 
perception and intonation recognition. Specifically, this study 
sought to answer the following research questions: (1) How and 
to what extent does familiarity, intonation and speech type 
affect participants’ performance of voice processing in speaker 
identity similarity perce ption task? (2) How do familiarity, 
intonation and speech type modulate participants’ performance 
during intonation recognition. 
The study makes two focused contributions : practically, 
preliminarily supporting the feasibility of incorporating AI-
generated speech in corpus ; theoretically, exploring cognitive 
differences in familiar /unfamiliar voice processing and in 
natural/AI-generated voice processing. 
2. Methodology 
2.1. Participant 
A total of 17 participants are recruited. All of them are involved 
in speaker identity similarity perception, and 11 of them take 
part in intonation recognition. Listeners ages range from 22 - 41 
years old (mean = 28.176, SD = 5.177), with 6 females and 11 
males. The participants are native speaker s of Mandarin 
3994
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-996
Chinese, without hearing disorders. All participants have signed 
informed consent prior to participation  in accordance with the 
guidelines of Institution of Software Chinese Academy of 
Sciences. 
The participants are given an overview of the experiment 
then listen to natural voices conducted by two of their familiar 
fellows. Participants who fail to recognize the speaker will be 
removed from the analysis of speaker identity similarity 
perception. 
2.2. Stimuli 
2.2.1. Material 
A set of 11 neutral Mandarin sentences with 6 words are used. 
One of them is used for practice session, the other 10 are used 
in formal experiments. Examples include “爸爸打开大门” 
(My father is opening the door, /pa51 pa51 ta214 kʰai55 ta51 mən35/). 
2 strangers and 2 people familiar with the participants are 
invited to read these sentences. This study adopts a binary 
operationalization of familiarity: “ Strange” (voices from 
strangers) vs. “ Familiar” (voices from acquaintances). All of 
the sentences are recorded twice in both statement and question 
intonations. Recordings with better quality are selected as the 
materials. Thus, the stimuli would not introduce unnaturalness 
that could be used as a cue f or recognition. Meanwhile, these  
speakers are as ked to recorded a speech with maximized 
emotional expressiveness  for conversion of subsequent 
synthetic voices, without presenting to participants [16].  All 
speakers are native Chinese speakers, female, aging from 25 to 
45 year. The recordings take place in a soundproof recording 
booth at a phonetic lab with Praat at 44.1 kHz . Figure 1 shows 
representative f₀ contours for “ 爸爸打开大门”. The recording 
equipment used is RODE Wireless GO II microphone. 
 
Figure 1: Representative f₀ contours of “爸爸打开大门” 
produced as a natural statement  and as a natural question  
2.2.2. AI-generated stimuli  
Synthetic voices are generated with an F0-conditioned singing 
voice conversion (SVC) model 1. The core mechanism of the 
original SVC model involves capturing the semantic content 
and pitch variations (i.e., the F0 contour) from the source 
speaker's singing voice and converting them into the target 
speaker's timbre [17, 18]. 
To objectively evaluate the similarity between the 
converted voice and the target speaker's reference voice, we 
employ a widely-used, open-source speaker recognition model. 
Specifically, we utilize its speaker encoder to extract speaker 
embeddings from the  audio segments. The cosine similarity 
between the embedding of the converted speech and that of the 
target speaker's reference speech is then computed and used as 
the speaker similarity metric. This score ranges from -1 to 1, 
with a higher value indicatin g greater similarity  [19, 20] . 
Statement showed a mean similarity score of 0.55 (SD = 0.28), 
while questions showed a mean of 0.51 (SD = 0.30), suggesting 
comparable similarity levels across sentence types. 
Synthetic voices of each sentence in higher score are 
selected. Then, 2 experts in phonetics are invited to pick the 
voices with the best intonation expression. If disagreement 
 
1https://github.com/Plachtaa/seed-vc 
exists, the third expert is invited to evaluate and make selection. 
Figure 2 shows representative f₀ contours of AI-generated for 
“爸爸打开大门”. 
 
Figure 2: Representative f₀ contours of “爸爸打开大门” 
produced as an AI statement and as an AI question 
2.3. Procedure 
Generally, the study employs a 2 × 2 × 2 within-subject design, 
with the factor of speech type (natural vs. synthetic), familiarity 
to the speaker (famil iar vs. strange) and intonation (statement 
vs. question). The dependent variables are response time (RT) 
and accuracy (ACC). The experiment is implemented in 
PsychoPy. The stimulus lists are all counterbalanced. The study 
is consisted of 2 experiments, speaker  identity similarity 
perception and intonation recognition, conducting on different 
days. Before formal experiment, participants need to go through 
a practice session to ensure that they have understood the task. 
Sentences used in practice session do not present in the formal 
experiment. 
2.3.1. Speaker identity similarity perception 
For speaker identity similarity perception, participants are 
asked to make an assessment on two different sentences they 
heard, choosing whether the sentences are conducted by the 
same person, then giving a score from 1 to 7 for the similarity. 
Point 7 accounts for that the two sentences in one trial are 
conducted by c ompletely the same person, point 1 indicated 
completely different persons. Inspired by the experimental 
design in a previous study [5], the pairs are: 
(1) [strange] / [same identity] / [nature] (A - A) 
(2) [strange] / [same identity] / [nature and synthetic] (A - A') 
(3) [strange] / [different identity] / [nature] (A - B) 
(4) [familiar] / [same identity] / [nature] (C - C) 
(5) [familiar] / [same identity] / [nature and synthetic] (C - C') 
(6) [familiar] / [different identity] / [nature] (C - D) 
A, B, C and D denote 4 different speakers: A and B are 
strange speakers to the participants, while C and D are familiar 
speakers. A’ and C’ represent synthetic voices of the same 
speakers as A and C, respectively. 
Every stimulus can be categori zed into one of three 
conditions, paired randomly with balanced frequency. Each pair 
will be heard for twice, and all the pairs are separated into 4 
blocks with balanced sequence. The trial procedure is shown in 
Figure 3. Participants listen to a voice pair, waiting for the green 
fixation response with keyboard. After that, they are asked to 
choose from 1 to 7 to assess the degree of similarity. 
 
Figure 3: Trial procedure of speaker identity similarity 
perception 
3995
2.3.2. Intonation recognition 
For intonation recognition, the participants are asked to make a 
judgement on whether the intonation is statement or question. 
The 8 conditions are strange -synthetic-statement, strange -
synthetic-question, strange -real-statement, strange -real-
question, fami liar-synthetic-statement, familiar -synthetic-
question, familiar-real-statement, familiar-real-question. All of 
stimulus are separated in to 4 blocks. The procedure of trial is 
shown in Figure 4. Participants listen to a voice stimulus, 
waiting for the gree n fixation to make response through 
keyboard. 
 
Figure 4: Trial procedure of intonation recognition 
2.3.3. Experimental setting  
Participants listen to the voice stimuli in front of a screen 
monitor at 60 Hz with 1024*768 resolution. In both speaker  
identity similarity perceptions task and intonation recognition 
tasks, participants are asked to wear a headphone, then sitting 
65cm from the computer, in a quiet labora tory environment. 
The voices stimuli are presented comfortably through the 
headphone. Participants are allowed to adjust the computer 
volume to a comfortable listening level.  Figure 5 is the 
experimental setting. 
 
Figure 5: The experimental setting 
2.4. Data analysis 
Statistical analyses are conducted in R. For speaker  identity 
similarity perception study, log -transformed RT data are 
analyzed with linear mixed-effects models implemented in the 
lme4 package  [21]. ACC data are analyzed with generalized 
linear mixed-effects models with a binomial link function. 
Score data are analyzed using cumulative link mixed models 
(CLMMs) with a logit link function, implemented in the ordinal 
package in R. Given the ordinal na ture of the 7-point Likert 
scale, CLMMs were used instead o f linear models. Intonation, 
familiarity and speech type are entered as fixed effects, while 
participants and items are entered as random effects.  
For intonation recognition study, RTs are log-transformed 
prior to analysis to reduce skewness and approximate normality. 
Log-transformed RTs were analyzed using linear mixed-effects 
models (LMMs) implemented in the lme4 package in R. Fixed 
effects included speech type, familiarity, and intonation, with 
random intercepts for participants and items. Accuracy data 
exists ceiling effect (mean accuracy is more than 95%). Due to 
potential separation issues in standard logistic regression 
models, accuracy data were analyzed using Firth’s bias-reduced 
logistic regression implemented in the logist ic package in R. 
The high accuracy suggest that the task was generally easy for 
adult participants, as expected. Therefore, reaction time 
measures provide a more sensitive index of processing 
differences across conditions. 
3. Results 
3.1. Speaker identity similarity perception 
3.1.1. Accuracy 
Logistic regression revealed a significant effect of speech type 
(Chisq(1) = 11.244, p < 0.001), indicating higher accuracy for 
2 natural speeches in one pair (Mean = 0.917, SE = 0.014) than 
natural and synthetic speech in one pair (Mean  = 0.851, SE = 
0.018; z = 3.246, p = 0.001). A significant interaction between 
speech type and intonation is found (Chisq(1) = 5.988,  p = 
0.014). Simple effects are then used to further explore it. For 
pairs consisted of only natural speeches, the accuracy of 
question stimul i ( Mean = 0.946, SE = 0.014) is significantly 
higher than statement (Mean = 0.875, SE = 0.022; z = 2.83, p = 
0.046). For pairs consisted of both natural and synthetic 
speeches, no significant difference exists between question 
(Mean = 0.826, SE = 0.025) and statement (Mean  = 0.872, SE 
= 0.022; z = -1.464, p = 0.143). No other significant differences 
are observed. 
 
Figure 6: Accuracy of speaker identity similarity perception 
3.1.2. Reaction time 
A significant effect of familiarity is observed ( F(1, 1052) = 
6.713, p = 0.010), indicating longer RTs for strange speakers 
(Mean = 0.848s, SE = 0.089) compared to familiar speakers 
(Mean = 0.748s, SE = 0.078). No other significant differences 
are observed. 
 
Figure 7: Reaction time of speaker identity similarity 
perception 
3.1.3. Score of similarity 
A significant effect of familiarity is observed (Chisq(1) = 5.448, 
p = 0.020), indicating higher ratings for strange speakers (Mean 
= 3.930, SE = 0.131) than the familiar (Mean = 3.560, SE = 
0.135; z = -2.372, p = 0.018). Another significant main effect is 
found in speech type (Chisq(1) = 3.906, p = 0.048), indicating 
that 2 natural speech type s (Mean = 3.900, SE = 0.136) are 
scored higher in similarity than natural and synthetic speeches 
(Mean = 3.600, SE = 0.130; z  = 1.899, p = 0.058). No other 
significant differences are observed. 
 
Figure 8: Score of speaker identity similarity in similarity 
perception 
3996
3.2. Intonation recognition 
3.2.1. Accuracy 
Firth’s bias-reduced logistic regression revealed a significant 
interaction of familiarity and speech type (LR Chisq(1) = 4.078, 
p = 0.043). Simple effects are then used to further explore it. 
For natural speeches, the accuracy of strange voices (Mean = 
0.987, SE = 0.006) is higher than the familiar  (Mean = 0.982, 
SE = 0.008; z = -0.468, p = 0.640). For synthetic speeches, the 
accuracy of strange voices (Mean = 0.973, SE = 0.012) is lower 
than the familiar (M ean = 0.992, SE = 0.007 ; z = 1.287, p  = 
0.198). No other significant differences are observed. 
 
Figure 9: Accuracy of intonation recognition 
3.2.2 Reaction time 
A marginal significant effect of intonation is observed (F (1, 
1178.03) = 3.844, p = 0.050), indicating longer RTs for 
questions (Mean = 0.270s, SE = 0.014) compared to statement 
(Mean = 0.249s, SE = 0.013). No other significant differences 
are observed. 
 
Figure 10: Reaction time of intonation recognition 
4. Discussion 
The present study aims to find out whether there is difference 
of voice processing between natural and synthetic voices, and 
how familiarity and intonation contribute to the process. In the 
speaker identity similarity perception task, a n interaction 
towards accuracy between speech type and intonation is 
observed. In the intonation recognition task, an interaction 
towards accuracy between speech type and familiarity is 
observed. In the following sections, these findings will be 
interpreted respectively in different tasks. 
4.1. Speaker identity similarity perception 
Prior studies have noted the compl exity of human speech, 
because of its tone, timbre, intonation, and tempo, as well as the 
potential quality compression when dealing with these details  
[12, 13]. An initial objective of the project is to identify whether 
there are significant differences between real voices and 
synthetic voices, which are strong enough to affect people's 
perception and recognition. The current study finds that there is 
a significant interaction between speech type and intonation. 
This sugge sted that question  may serve as a cue for speaker 
identification, which in line with an opinion that linguistic 
prosody contributes to the impression of speakers identification 
[22, 23] . Meanwhile, may be further influenced by synthetic 
voices. The results are in accordance with recent studies 
indicating the difficulty in replicating those mentioned voices 
identifications [12, 13]. 
Another important finding is that familiarity shows 
significant main effect in reaction times and scoring. 
Participants make response to voices from familiar people 
faster than the strange, which supports the opinion that 
familiarity facilitates speech pro cessing efficiency. Familiar 
voices benefit from stored acoustic representations in long-term 
memory, allowing listeners to process and recognize them more 
rapidly and with reduced cognitive effort [2] . Another result is 
that participants score the similar ity of familiar people lower 
than the strange. A possible explanation for this might be that 
the ease of processing makes participants able to deal with 
acoustic representations from familiar people precisely. In other 
word, standard for evaluation differs . Faster reaction times 
indicate facilitated processing, while lower similarity ratings 
reflect more precise discrimination. This pattern is consistent 
with models of perceptual learning and talker adaptation, which 
propose that familiarity improves the re solution of perceptual 
representations and enhances sensitivity to within-speaker 
variation [24]. 
4.2. Intonation recognition 
Several reports have shown that familiarity may conduct 
different contribution to voice processing in different situations 
[2, 24]. When recognizing the intonation, for accuracy, 
interaction between familiarity and speech type is found. 
Specifically, under the condition of voices from real people, the 
accuracy of the strange is higher than the familiar ones. Under 
the conditions of s ynthetic voices, the result is converse. This 
result may be explained by the different roles of familiarity. For 
the former result, to process natural voices, participants are able 
to consider more details of familiar voices, and making 
comparison between the present voices and the representations 
in their cognitive structure , t hat is, judging by different 
standards between natural voices and synthetic voices. 
Meanwhile, in this study, for reaction time, the effect of 
intonation is marginal significant. This discrepancy could be 
attributed to the differences of F0, which seems to support the 
ideas that the difference of F0 between statement and question 
is more discernable at the end of sentences  [25, 26, 27]. Since 
no significant interaction has been observed, it indicates that 
this phenomenon holds for both real and synthetic speech. 
Based on the above findings, this study reveals that 
leveraging current AI voice cloning technology to construct 
high-quality corpora for language training remains challenging. 
It is particularly evident that there are limitations when the 
synthesis includes complex prosodic features (e.g. intonation) 
and social cues (e.g. speaker familiarity). However, this paper 
represents only a preliminary exploration of this question, 
whilst AI cloning technology continues to evolve. Future work 
may undertake more exte nsive and multidimensional 
investigations into this matter. 
5. Conclusions 
This study examines how speech type (natural and synthetic), 
familiarity (familiar and strange) and intonation (statement and 
question) influence participants’ performance in similarity 
perception and intonation recognition tasks. In similarity 
perception task, significant interactions are found on intonation 
and speech type in accuracy, indicating that prosodic details, 
such as intonation may contribute to speakers identification. In 
intonation recognition task, significant interactions are found 
on famili arity and speech type in accuracy, indicating that 
participants may treat voices from familiar people more 
prudently. The results provide preliminary behavioral evidence 
for the perceptual viability of synthetic voices generated by 
SVC model in controlled experimental contexts. The present 
findings suggest that SVC-generated voices holds potential for 
corpus construction in intonation research, though further 
refinement is needed to fully capture speaker-level prosodic 
features. Future studies may extend these findings in a larger 
number of participants, collecting data from diverse 
participants with broader corpora. 
3997
6. Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program 
of China (2024YFC3308500), the NSFC (62332015), the 
project of China Disabled Persons Federation 
(CDPF2023KF00002), the Youth Innovation Promotion 
Association CAS Grant (2023119), and the China Postdoctoral 
Science Foundation (2024M763393). This study was approved 
by the Ethics Committee of the Institute of Software, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences (approval no. 2025-YF-001). 
7. Generative AI Disclosure 
Gener