Beyond One-Size-Fits-All: Personalized and Culturally Adaptive Emotional
TTS via Interactive Optimization of Individual Emotion Perception Spaces
Wangzixi Zhou ID , Bagus Tris Atmaja ID , Sakriani Sakti ID
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Japan
zhou.wangzixi.az3@naist.ac.jp, bagus.tris@naist.ac.jp, ssakti@is.naist.jp
Abstract
The rise of conversational AI has increased interest in emotional
Text-to-Speech (TTS). Most systems rely on discrete emotion
labels, which fail to capture the nuanced nature of human af-
fect. Recent models employ dimensional representations such
as Russell’s arousal–valence (A–V) model, offering finer con-
trol. However, emotional perception varies across individuals
and cultures, which may cause mismatches between modeled
and perceived emotions. We propose a personalized and cultur-
ally adaptive emotional TTS framework that performs interac-
tive optimization of individualized A–V perception spaces us-
ing an Interactive Genetic Algorithm. By adapting emotion rep-
resentations to each listener, the system produces speech with
more perceptually aligned emotional expression than models
using averaged A–V values. Evaluations with Japanese, Chi-
nese, and Indonesian participants highlight the importance of
personalization and cultural adaptation for moving beyond one-
size-fits-all emotional TTS.
Index Terms: emotional text-to-speech, personalization and
cultural adaptation, emotion perception modeling
1. Introduction
Human emotion is inherently complex, shaped by subtle phys-
iological, psychological, and social factors. Rather than exist-
ing as simple categorical states, emotional experiences lie on a
continuum influenced by personality, gender, culture, and sit-
uational context [1]. Capturing this variability is essential for
speech synthesis systems that aim to interact naturally with hu-
mans, as emotion conveys intent, empathy, and engagement.
In affective computing, two widely adopted theoretical
frameworks are the Emotion Wheel [2], which organizes emo-
tions into discrete categories (e.g., happiness, sadness, anger),
and Russell’s Circumplex Model [3], which represents emo-
tions along continuous dimensions of arousal and valence.
While state-of-the-art neural Text-to-Speech (TTS) systems
[4, 5, 6, 7] have achieved high quality and naturalness, many
emotional TTS approaches still rely on discrete style labels to
represent emotion [8, 9, 10, 11]. Such categorical representa-
tions limit the expression of subtle affective variations and of-
ten produce speech that sounds exaggerated or inflexible. To
address this limitation, arousal–valence (A–V) representations
have been explored in emotional TTS [12, 13, 14] to enable
finer emotional control and smoother transitions between affec-
tive states.
However, emotional perception is inherently subjective
and culturally influenced. Models trained on averaged
annotations—often derived from a single cultural popula-
tion—implicitly assume a universal mapping between acoustic
cues and perceived emotion. This assumption overlooks both
individual variability and cross-cultural differences in emo-
tional interpretation. Consequently, even when dimensional
control is available, fixed A–V mappings may fail to align with
a specific listener’s perception of emotion.
Recent large-scale preference learning approaches, such
as reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) [15]
and related alignment methods [16], have demonstrated success
in aligning model behavior with human preferences through
gradient-based retraining. However, these approaches typically
target dataset-level alignment and require substantial preference
data and model updates. In contrast, our objective is rapid per-
user adaptation under extremely limited interactive feedback,
without modifying the backbone acoustic model.
To address this challenge, we formulate emotional person-
alization as a low-dimensional perceptual optimization prob-
lem within the arousal–valence control space of neural TTS.
We introduce a lightweight post-training personalization layer
that refines emotion representations for each listener using di-
rect preference feedback. As a practical instantiation of this in-
teractive optimization process, we adopt an Interactive Genetic
Algorithm (IGA) [17] to iteratively adjust A–V coordinates for
target emotions. This design enables efficient adaptation with
minimal user interaction, without retraining the pretrained TTS
backbone or learning an explicit reward model.
Importantly, our approach personalizes the perceptual emo-
tion mapping while keeping the high-dimensional acoustic
representation fixed. By restricting adaptation to the low-
dimensional emotion control space, the framework enables
practical per-user customization while preserving model sta-
bility. Through this process, we obtain individualized variants
of Russell’s circumplex model that better reflect each listener’s
emotional interpretation.
Our key contributions are as follows:
• We propose a lightweight post-training personalization
framework for emotional TTS that adapts arousal–valence
representations to individual listeners under limited interac-
tive feedback, instantiated using an Interactive Genetic Algo-
rithm (IGA).
• We design an emotion controller that maps personalized A–V
coordinates to high-dimensional acoustic features, enabling
fine-grained and perceptually aligned emotional expression.
• We conduct a cross-cultural evaluation involving Japanese,
Chinese, and Indonesian participants, demonstrating that
both individual personalization and cultural adaptation sig-
nificantly improve emotional alignment compared to one-
size-fits-all models.
Speech samples from experiments are available on the demo
page1.
1https://37integer.github.io/Beyond-One-Size-Fits-All/
4254
Interspeech 2026
27 September - 1 October 2026, Sydney, Australia
10.21437/Interspeech.2026-1696
Start
Initialization 
A-V value
Emotion label
Sad
1 [-0.3, -0.7]
Obtain preferred 
sample
IGA 
mutation
End
Speech sample
Generator 
(Emotional TTS)
Satisfied?[-0.5, -0.6]
[-0.1, -0.5]
2
3
Yes
No
A-V value
Personalized 
A-V value
A
Personalized 
A-V Values
U.S. Data-based 
A-V Values
A B
1st group: 
Participants from
personalization stage
A/B preference Evaluation
A
Culture-Specific A-V 
Values
U.S. Data-based 
A-V Values
A B
2nd group:
New participants
(a)Human-in-the-loop personalization with IGA
Output 
speech
Generator
Text
Emotion 
Controller
Text Encoder
Diffusion 
Decoder
 (b)Architecture of the emotional TTS generator
Figure 1:Overview of the proposed framework: (a) human-in-the-loop personalization using an Interactive Genetic Algorithm (IGA);
(b) architecture of the emotional TTS generator with the proposed emotion controller .
2. Related Work
2.1. Controllable Emotional TTS
Emotional speech synthesis has evolved from categorical emo-
tion representations (e.g., “happy,” “sad”) [8, 9, 10, 11] to di-
mensional emotion representations such as arousal, valence,
and dominance [12, 13, 14]. Dimensional representations en-
able smoother and more fine-grained affect modulation com-
pared to discrete styles. However, both categorical and dimen-
sional emotional TTS models are typically trained on averaged
population-level annotations, implicitly assuming a universal
mapping between acoustic cues and perceived emotion. Such
an assumption overlooks individual and cultural variability in
emotional interpretation, potentially leading to mismatches be-
tween synthesized emotion and listener perception.
2.2. Personalized Speech Synthesis
Personalization in TTS has primarily focused on speaker iden-
tity, voice timbre, and prosodic style modeling [18, 19, 20].
These approaches enable voice cloning and flexible speaking
style control but do not explicitly address personalization of
emotional perception. Emotional expression in neural TTS is
typically modeled using population-level representations, leav-
ing individual and cultural differences in emotion interpreta-
tion largely unexplored. Extending personalization to emotional
perception therefore remains an open challenge.
2.3. Preference-Guided Interactive Optimization
Preference-guided optimization incorporates human evaluation
into the learning or search process, making it particularly suit-
able for subjective perceptual tasks. Large-scale alignment ap-
proaches such as reinforcement learning with human feedback
(RLHF) [15] and related techniques [16] optimize model be-
havior through gradient-based retraining using large preference
datasets, primarily targeting global model alignment.
In contrast, interactive optimization focuses on localized
adaptation under limited feedback. The Interactive Genetic Al-
gorithm (IGA) [17], an extension of traditional genetic algo-
rithms [21], evolves candidate solutions based on user prefer-
ence rather than explicit objective functions. IGA has been
applied in visual design [17] and perceptual audio optimiza-
tion [22]. While evolutionary search appeared in earlier unit
concatenative TTS systems [23], its use as a lightweight post-
training perceptual adaptation mechanism for modern neural
emotional TTS with continuous A–V control remains largely
unexplored.
Taken together, these limitations motivate the need for a
framework that directly adapts emotional representations to in-
dividual listeners through efficient interactive optimization.
3. Proposed Framework
We propose a personalized emotional TTS framework with
human-in-the-loop preference learning. The overall archi-
tecture is illustrated in Fig. 1 and consists of two compo-
nents: (a) emotion preference learning that personalizes the
arousal–valence (A–V) emotion space through user feedback,
and (b) an emotion-controllable speech generator conditioned
on A–V coordinates.
3.1. Emotion Preference Learning
As illustrated in Fig. 1a, we propose an emotion preference
learning framework driven by an Interactive Genetic Algorithm
(IGA). The primary objective is to personalize the mapping
from discrete emotion categories to continuous A-V coordi-
nates, aligning synthesized speech with each listener’s percep-
tual preferences. The optimization procedure is summarized in
Algorithm 1. Given a target emotion (e.g.,sad), the system ini-
tiates an iterative optimization process: it generates a popula-
tion of candidate A–V coordinates, synthesizes the correspond-
ing speech samples, and dynamically refines these coordinates
based on explicit user feedback until a highly satisfactory emo-
tional expression is achieved.
Algorithm 1Emotion Preference Learning via IGA
Require:Target emotionE, generatorG, population sizeN
1:Initialize candidate coordinates{e i}N
i=1
2:Set generation counterg= 1
3:repeat
4:fori= 1toNdo
5:Synthesize speech sampless i =G(e i)
6:end for
7:Present{s i}to user and obtain preferred sampleS pref
8:Retain parent setP={e k|s k∈S pref}.
9:fori=|P|+ 1toNdo
10:Generate new candidate{e k}according to Eq. 1
11:end for
12:Update mutation strengthM g+1 according to Eq. 2
13:g=g+ 1
14:untiluser satisfaction
15:returnoptimized personalized coordinatee k
During the preference learning, the user selects the samples
that align with their perception of the target emotion. Based on
this preference, the IGA evolves the new candidate set through
a parent-based reproduction mechanism. The user-selected can-
didates will be directly preserved in the next generation. The al-
gorithm utilizes multi-parent arithmetic crossover and uniform
4255
mutation. Specifically, given the preferred parent setP, a new
child coordinatee k is generated through a random weighted
combination of all parents inP:
ek =
|P|X
j=1
wjpj + ∆,(1)
wherepj∈P, andw j∈[0,1]are random weights constrained
by P|P|
j=1wj = 1. The term∆∼U(−M g,Mg)represents
a random mutation perturbation applied independently to the
arousal and valence dimensions.
To dynamically balance global exploration and local con-
vergence, the mutation strengthM g decays multiplicatively
over successive generations. The strength at generationgis de-
fined by the following piecewise decay function:
Mg = max(Mmin,Mg−1·γ),(2)
where the initial mutation strength is set toM 1 = 0.20, the
decay rate isγ= 0.90, and the lower bound isM min = 0.05.
This human-in-the-loop interaction typically converges within a
few iterations once the listener’s internal emotional criteria are
met. Through this process, Russell’s circumplex model is adap-
tively reshaped for each listener, enabling emotional speech
synthesis that reflects both individual and cultural perception
patterns.
3.2. Emotional Speech Generator with Emotion Controller
The speech generator architecture is shown in Fig. 1b. We adopt
Grad-TTS [24] as the backbone and use Russell’s circumplex
model [3], represented by arousal and valence (A–V), as the
control interface for emotional speech synthesis. To achieve
fine-grained emotional control, we introduce an Emotion Con-
troller module that maps A–V coordinates to emotion-related
acoustic features used by the generator.
As shown in Fig. 1b, the Emotion Controller consists of
three components: the proposed Emotion Feature Predictor, a
Pitch Predictor, and an Energy Predictor (adapted from Fast-
Speech 2 [25]). These modules jointly condition prosody on
emotional cues and acoustic features, linking emotional state to
low-level speech dynamics.
The Emotion Feature Predictor bridges the gap between
the low-dimensional arousal–valence (A–V) space and high-
dimensional emotion representations extracted from speech. It
learns a mappingf θ from an A–V coordinatee= [a,v]∈R 2
to a latent emotion feature vectorhgt∈R Df eat.
Training targetshgt are obtained from a pre-trained Speech
Emotion Recognition (SER) model [26], which encodes high-
level emotion-related acoustic features. Using these representa-
tions enables the model to learn emotion-related acoustic struc-
ture without additional manual annotation.
To enhance the representation capacity of the low-
dimensional input, we apply Gaussian Fourier feature mapping:
γ(e) = [sin(2πeB),cos(2πeB)]∈R Df,
whereB∈R 2×(Df/2) is a fixed Gaussian matrix andDf is the
Fourier feature dimension. The resulting feature vectore ff =
γ(e)is fed into a four-layer MLP consisting of linear layers,
SiLU activations, and dropout. A final linear projection maps
the output to the target feature dimensionDfeat , producing the
predicted latent featurehpred. The model is trained using an L1
loss betweenhpred andhgt.
During training, pitch and energy predictors are condi-
tioned on ground-truth emotion features. During inference, only
the A–V coordinate is required, and the Emotion Feature Pre-
dictor generates the corresponding emotion representation used
by the generator.
In our framework, the SER-derived feature space is trained
prior to the IGA process and remains fixed, providing a stable
acoustic prior for emotional speech synthesis. Personalization
is achieved by adapting the A–V coordinates through human-in-
the-loop preference learning, allowing users to reposition emo-
tions according to subjective perception without retraining the
acoustic model.
4. Experimental Setup
4.1. Dataset and Training Setup
Dataset:We constructed a 9-hour American English fe-
male emotional speech dataset (22.05 kHz) by combining EX-
PRESSO [27], EmoV-DB [28], and ESD [9]. Since these
datasets do not provide continuous arousal–valence (A–V) an-
notations, we estimated A–V values using a pre-trained Speech
Emotion Recognition (SER) model [26].
Model and Training:Acoustic features were 80-dimensional
mel-spectrograms and HiFi-GAN [29] was used as the vocoder.
As a baseline, we implemented Grad-TTS with a simple A–V
emotion embedding layer. Models were trained for 2000 epochs
using Adam on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. Default
Grad-TTS hyperparameters were used unless specified.
4.2. Human-in-the-Loop Personalization
We recruited 30 participants from three Asian cultural groups:
Chinese, Indonesian, and Japanese (10 per group, gender bal-
anced). Seven emotions were used: angry, confused, sad,
happy, disgust, sleepiness, and neutral.
Participants performed interactive personalization using the
IGA loop for three sentences per emotion. In each round, partic-
ipants selected the sample that best matched the target emotion.
The process typically converged within three rounds, producing
a personalized A–V mapping for each user. Cultural average
A–V values were then computed for cross-cultural analysis.
4.3. Evaluation Protocol
Objective Metrics:We evaluated 100 synthesized utterances
using:
•Word Error Rate (WER)for speech intelligibility.
•Concordance Correlation Coefficient (CCC)[30] to mea-
sure emotional similarity by comparing SER-predicted A–V
values between generated and reference speech.
Subjective Metrics:Listening tests involved 30 participants.
•MOS:Participants rated the naturalness of 20 utterances on
a five-point scale.
•A/B preference:Two groups were used. The first group (15
participants from the personalization stage) compared per-
sonalized A–V speech with the baseline using averaged U.S.
dataset A–V values. The second group (15 new participants)
evaluated culturally adapted speech using Japanese, Chinese,
and Indonesian A–V averages against the same baseline. All
tests were conducted blindly.
5. Experimental Results
5.1. Speech Quality and Emotional Similarity
Table 1 summarizes the performance of the emotional speech
generator before human-in-the-loop IGA personalization. We
compare the baseline Grad-TTS with emotion embedding
against Grad-TTS with the proposed emotion controller.
4256
(a)Chinese
 (b)Indonesian
 (c)Japanese
Figure 2:A–V distributions from the personalization process for (a) Chinese, (b) Indonesian, and (c) Japanese participants. The•
indicates participant-selected A–V values, and×indicates averaged reference dataset values.
Table 1:Results of MOS, WER, and CCC. Proposed method is
shown inbold. A: arousal, V: valence.
MOS↑WER(%)↓CCC(A)↑CCC(V)↑
Ground truth 4.04±0.09 - - -
Grad-TTS w/emo emb 3.37±0.10 21 0.60 0.64
Grad-TTS w/emo ctrl 3.75±0.09 17 0.84 0.77
Our model increases MOS from 3.37 to 3.75 and achieves
a 23.5% relative reduction in WER, indicating improved speech
naturalness and intelligibility. Emotional similarity also im-
proves, with CCC increasing from 0.60 to 0.84 for arousal and
from 0.64 to 0.77 for valence, suggesting closer alignment be-
tween synthesized and reference emotional characteristics.
5.2. A–V Space after Personalization
Figure 2 shows A–V mappings obtained through the personal-
ization process. Most personalized A–V values deviate from
those in the original U.S.-based dataset, indicating that emo-
tional perception varies across individuals and cultures.
Chinese participants (Fig. 2a) exhibit relatively narrow
arousal ranges but wider valence variation. Indonesian partici-
pants (Fig. 2b) show tighter clustering around emotion centers,
suggesting more consistent emotional interpretation within the
group. Japanese participants (Fig. 2c) tend to map negative
emotions to lower arousal and require stronger expressions for
positive emotions, reflecting a tendency toward restrained emo-
tional expression.
5.3. Subjective Evaluation
Personalization:Participants who completed the IGA person-
alization process performed blind A/B comparisons between
speech generated using their personalized A–V values and
speech generated using the U.S.-based reference A–V baseline.
As shown in Fig. 3 (left bars), participants were unaware of
which sample corresponded to their personalized mapping, yet
personalized speech achieved a preference rate of 76%. This re-
sult indicates that listeners consistently favored speech aligned
with their own emotion perception.
Culture-specific evaluation:A second group of partici-
pants who did not undergo personalization evaluated culturally
adapted speech generated using culture-specific A–V averages
(Chinese, Indonesian, and Japanese) against the U.S.-based
baseline. As shown in Fig. 3 (right bars), evaluations were con-
ducted blindly, and participants were unaware of the cultural
Figure 3:A/B preference test results.
source of each sample. Preference rates were 64.8%, 69.8%,
and 65.6%, respectively, suggesting improved emotional align-
ment.
Cross-cultural evaluation:In addition, we also conducted a
cross-cultural evaluation in which participants ranked samples
generated using Chinese, Indonesian, and Japanese A–V val-
ues. Participants from all three cultures consistently preferred
samples generated with their own culture’s A–V mapping. Chi-
nese participants selected Chinese samples 65% of the time,
while Japanese and Indonesian participants showed preferences
of 67% and 70%, respectively. These preliminary results sug-
gest group-level differences in preferred A-V mappings.
6. Conclusion
We presented a novel personalized emotional TTS framework
that incorporates human-in-the-loop optimization with an Inter-
active Genetic Algorithm to address the subjectivity of emotion
perception. Our results show that the proposed emotional con-
troller improves both speech quality and emotional similarity,
while personalization highlights individual and cultural varia-
tion in emotional preferences. These findings underscore the
need to move beyond generic emotional models toward systems
that adapt to both individual users and cultural contexts. Fu-
ture work will explore broader linguistic and cultural settings,
as well as strategies for real-time personalization, advancing the
goal of emotionally adaptive conversational AI.
4257
7. Acknowledgement
Part of this work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Numbers JP24K0296 and JP25H01139, as well as JST NEXUS
(JPMJNX25C1).
8. Generative AI Use Disclosure
Generative AI tools were used only for minor language editing,
such as grammar checking and wording refinement to improve
clarity. All manuscript content and scientific work—including
problem formulation, methodology development, experimental
design and execution, and data analysis- were conducted en-
tirely by the authors. The authors reviewed the final manuscript
and take full responsibility for its accuracy and integrity.
9. References
[1] A. H. Fischer, P. M. Rodriguez Mosquera, A. E. Van Vianen,
and A. S. Manstead, “Gender and culture differences in emotion.”
Emotion, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 87, 2004.
[2] R. Plutchik and H. Kellerman,Theories of emotion. Academic
press, 2013, vol. 1.
[3] J. A. Russell, “A circumplex model of affect.”Journal of person-
ality and social psychology, vol. 39, no. 6, p. 1161, 1980.
[4] S. Mehta, R. Tu, J. Beskow, ´E. Sz ´ekely, and G. E. Henter,
“Matcha-tts: A fast tts architecture with conditional flow match-
ing,” inICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2024,
pp. 11 341–11 345.
[5] Y . Chen, Z. Niu, Z. Ma, K. Deng, C. Wang, J. JianZhao, K. Yu,
and X. Chen, “F5-tts: A fairytaler that fakes fluent and faithful
speech with flow matching,” inProceedings of the 63rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (V olume
1: Long Papers), 2025, pp. 6255–6271.
[6] K. Shen, Z. Ju, X. Tan, Y . Liu, Y . Leng, L. He, T. Qin, S. Zhao,
and J. Bian, “Naturalspeech 2: Latent diffusion models are natu-
ral and zero-shot speech and singing synthesizers,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.09116, 2023.
[7] Y . A. Li, C. Han, V . Raghavan, G. Mischler, and N. Mesgarani,
“Styletts 2: Towards human-level text-to-speech through style dif-
fusion and adversarial training with large speech language mod-
els,”Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 36,
pp. 19 594–19 621, 2023.
[8] H. Barakat, O. Turk, and C. Demiroglu, “Deep learning-based
expressive speech synthesis: a systematic review of approaches,
challenges, and resources,”EURASIP Journal on Audio, Speech,
and Music Processing, vol. 2024, no. 1, p. 11, 2024.
[9] K. Zhou, B. Sisman, R. Liu, and H. Li, “Emotional voice con-
version: Theory, databases and esd,”Spee